 
PART I  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART I OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
General provisions 
Rule 1  
Written proceedings 
In written proceedings before the European Patent Office, the requirement 
to use the written form shall be satisfied if the content of the documents can 
be reproduced in a legible form on paper. 
Rule 2
Filing of and formal requirements for documents 
(1)2 In proceedings before the European Patent Office, documents may 
be filed by delivery by hand, by postal services or by means of electronic 
communication. The President of the European Patent Office shall lay 
down the details and conditions and, where appropriate, any special formal 
or technical requirements for the filing of documents. In particular, he may 
specify that confirmation must be supplied. If such confirmation is not 
supplied in due time, the European patent application shall be refused; 
documents filed subsequently shall be deemed not to have been received. 
(2) 
Where the Convention provides that a document must be signed, the 
authenticity of the document may be confirmed by handwritten signature or 
other appropriate means the use of which has been permitted by the 
President of the European Patent Office. A document authenticated by 
such other means shall be deemed to meet the legal requirements of sig-
nature in the same way as a document bearing a handwritten signature 
which has been filed in paper form.  
 


10 
Rule 3
Language in written proceedings 
(1) 
In written proceedings before the European Patent Office, any party 
may use any official language of the European Patent Office. The 
translation referred to in Article 14, paragraph 4, may be filed in any official 
language of the European Patent Office. 
(2) 
Amendments to a European patent application or European patent 
shall be filed in the language of the proceedings. 
(3) 
Documentary evidence and, in particular, publications may be filed in 
any language. The European Patent Office may, however, require that a 
translation in one of its official languages be filed, within a period to be 
specified. If a required translation is not filed in due time, the European 
Patent Office may disregard the document in question. 
Rule 4  
Language in oral proceedings 
(1) 
Any party to oral proceedings before the European Patent Office may 
use an official language of the European Patent Office other than the 
language of the proceedings, if such party gives notice to the European 
Patent Office at least one month before the date of such oral proceedings 
or provides for interpretation into the language of the proceedings. Any 
party may use an official language of a Contracting State, if he provides for 
interpretation into the language of the proceedings. The European Patent 
Office may permit derogations from these provisions.  
(2) 
In the course of oral proceedings, employees of the European Patent 
Office may use an official language of the European Patent Office other 
than the language of the proceedings. 
(3) 
Where evidence is taken, any party, witness or expert to be heard 
who is unable to express himself adequately in an official language of the 
European Patent Office or of a Contracting State may use another 
language. Where evidence is taken upon request of a party, parties, 
witnesses or experts expressing themselves in a language other than an 
official language of the European Patent Office shall be heard only if that 
party provides for interpretation into the language of the proceedings. The 
European Patent Office may, however, permit interpretation into one of its 
other official languages. 
(4) 
If the parties and the European Patent Office agree, any language 
may be used.  
(5) 
The European Patent Office shall, if necessary, provide at its own 
expense interpretation into the language of the proceedings, or, where 
appropriate, into its other official languages, unless such interpretation is 
the responsibility of one of the parties.  
 


 
 
11 
(6) 
Statements by employees of the European Patent Office, parties, 
witnesses or experts, made in an official language of the European Patent 
Office, shall be entered in the minutes in that language. Statements made 
in any other language shall be entered in the official language into which 
they are translated. Amendments to a European patent application or 
European patent shall be entered in the minutes in the language of the 
proceedings. 
Rule 5  
Certification of translations 
Where the translation of a document is required, the European Patent 
Office may require that a certificate that the translation corresponds to the 
original text be filed within a period to be specified. If the certificate is not 
filed in due time, such document shall be deemed not to have been filed, 
unless otherwise provided. 
Rule 6
Filing of translations and reduction of fees 
(1) 
A translation under Article 14, paragraph 2, shall be filed within two 
months of filing the European patent application. 
(2) 
A translation under Article 14, paragraph 4, shall be filed within one 
month of filing the document. This shall also apply to requests under 
Article 105a. Where the document is a notice of opposition or appeal, or a 
statement of grounds of appeal, or a petition for review, the translation may 
be filed within the period for filing such a notice or statement or petition, if 
that period expires later. 
(3)5 Where a person referred to in Article 14, paragraph 4, files a 
European patent application or a request for examination in a language 
admitted in that provision, the filing fee or examination fee shall be reduced 
in accordance with the Rules relating to Fees. 
(4) 
The reduction referred to in paragraph 3 shall be available for: 
(a) 
small and medium-sized enterprises;  
(b) 
natural persons; or 
(c) 
non-profit organisations, universities or public research organisations. 
(5) 
For the purposes of paragraph 4(a), Commission recommendation 
2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises as published in the Official Journal of the 
European Union L 124, p. 36 of 20 May 2003 shall apply. 
 
4 
Paragraph 3 amended and paragraphs 4-7 inserted by decision of the Administrative 
Council CA/D 19/13 of 13.12.2013 (OJ EPO 2014, A4), which entered into force on 
01.04.2014. 
 


12 
(6) 
An applicant wishing to benefit from the fee reduction referred to in 
paragraph 3 shall declare himself to be an entity or a natural person within 
the meaning of paragraph 4. In case of reasonable doubt as to the veracity 
of such declaration, the Office may require evidence.  
(7) 
In case of multiple applicants, each applicant shall be an entity or a 
natural person within the meaning of paragraph 4. 
Rule 7  
Legal authenticity of the translation of the European patent 
application 
Unless evidence is provided to the contrary, the European Patent Office 
shall assume, for the purpose of determining whether the subject-matter of 
the European patent application or European patent extends beyond the 
content of the application as filed, that the translation filed under Article 14, 
paragraph 2, or Rule 40, paragraph 3, is in conformity with the original text 
of the application. 
Chapter II  
Organisation of the European Patent Office 
Section 1  
General matters 
Rule 8  
Patent classification 
The European Patent Office shall use the classification referred to in 
Article 1 of the Strasbourg Agreement concerning the International Patent 
Classification of 24 March 1971, hereinafter referred to as the international 
classification. 
Rule 9  
Administrative structure of the European Patent Office 
(1)6 The European Patent Office shall be divided administratively into 
Directorates-General, to which the departments specified in Article 15(a) to 
(e), and the services set up to deal with legal matters and the internal 
administration of the Office, shall be assigned. 
(2) 
Each Directorate-General shall be directed by a Vice-President. The 
assignment of a Vice-President to a Directorate-General shall be decided 
by the Administrative Council, after the President of the European Patent 
Office has been consulted. 
Rule 10  
Responsibility of the Receiving Section and the Examining Division 
(1) 
The Receiving Section shall be responsible for the examination on 
filing and the examination as to formal requirements of a European patent 
application up to the time when the Examining Division becomes 
 

 
 
13 
responsible for the examination of the European patent application under 
Article 94, paragraph 1. 
(2) 
Subject to paragraphs 3 and 4, the Examining Division shall be 
responsible for the examination of a European patent application under 
Article 94, paragraph 1, from the time when a request for examination is 
filed. 
(3) 
If a request for examination is filed before the European search report 
has been transmitted to the applicant, the Examining Division shall, subject 
to paragraph 4, be responsible from the time when the European Patent 
Office receives the indication under Rule 70, paragraph 2.  
(4) 
If a request for examination is filed before the European search report 
has been transmitted to the applicant, and if the applicant has waived the 
right under Rule 70, paragraph 2, the Examining Division shall be 
responsible from the time when the search report is transmitted to the 
applicant.  
Rule 11
Allocation of duties to the departments of first instance 
(1) 
Technically qualified examiners acting as members of Search, 
Examining or Opposition Divisions shall be assigned to Directorates. The 
President of the European Patent Office shall allocate duties to these 
Directorates by reference to the international classification. 
(2)8 The President of the European Patent Office may allocate further 
duties to the Receiving Section, the Search, Examining and Opposition 
Divisions, and the Legal Division, in addition to the responsibilities vested in 
them under the Convention. 
(3)9 The President of the European Patent Office may entrust to 
employees who are not technically or legally qualified examiners the 
execution of duties falling to the Search, Examining or Opposition Divisions 
and involving no technical or legal difficulties. 
 

14 
Section 2  
Organisation of the Boards of Appeal and the Enlarged Board of 
Appeal 
Rule 12
  
(deleted) 
Rule 12a
Organisation and management of the Boards of Appeal Unit and 
President of the Boards of Appeal 
(1) 
The Boards of Appeal and the Enlarged Board of Appeal, including 
their registries and support services, shall be organised as a separate unit 
(the "Boards of Appeal Unit") and be directed by the President of the 
Boards of Appeal. The Chairman of the Enlarged Board of Appeal shall act 
as President of the Boards of Appeal. The President of the Boards of 
Appeal shall be appointed by the Administrative Council on a joint proposal 
made by the Committee established under Rule 12c, paragraph 1, and the 
President of the European Patent Office. If the President of the Boards of 
Appeal is absent or indisposed, one of the members of the Enlarged Board 
of Appeal shall take his place in accordance with the procedure laid down 
by the Administrative Council. 
(2)12 The President of the Boards of Appeal shall manage the Boards of 
Appeal Unit and, to this end, have the functions and powers delegated to 
him by the President of the European Patent Office. In exercising the 
delegated functions and powers, the President of the Boards of Appeal 
shall be responsible solely to the Administrative Council and shall be 
subject to its hierarchical and disciplinary authority. 
(3) 
Without prejudice to Article 10, paragraph 2(d), and Article 46, the 
President of the Boards of Appeal shall prepare a substantiated budget 
request for the Boards of Appeal Unit. This request shall be examined and 
discussed with the relevant departments of the European Patent Office, 
and be presented by the President of the Boards of Appeal to the 
Committee established under Rule 12c, paragraph 1, for opinion, before 
being forwarded to the President of the European Patent Office for 
consideration for the yearly draft budget. The President of the European 
Patent Office shall provide the President of the Boards of Appeal with the 
necessary resources, as set out in the adopted budget. 
(4) 
The President of the European Patent Office shall make the services 
mentioned in Rule 9, paragraph 1, available to the President of the Boards 
of Appeal as far as necessary and within the limits of the adopted budget. 
 
10 Deleted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 6/16 of 30.06.2016 (OJ EPO 
2016, A100), which entered into force on 01.07.2016. 
11 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 6/16 of 30.06.2016 (OJ EPO 
2016, A100), which entered into force on 01.07.2016. 
12 See delegation of functions and powers from the President of the EPO to the President 
of the Boards of Appeal (OJ EPO 2018, A63). 
Art. 15, 21, 22, 23 


 
 
15 
Rule 12b
Presidium of the Boards of Appeal and business distribution scheme 
for the Boards of Appeal 
(1)14 The autonomous authority within the Boards of Appeal Unit (the 
"Presidium of the Boards of Appeal") shall consist of the President of the 
Boards of Appeal, who shall act as chairman, and twelve members of the 
Boards of Appeal, six being Chairmen and six being other members. 
(2) 
All members of the Presidium shall be elected by the Chairmen and 
members of the Boards of Appeal for two working years. If the full 
composition of the Presidium cannot be reached, the vacancies shall be 
filled by designating the most senior Chairmen and members. 
(3) 
The Presidium shall: 
(a) 
adopt the Rules of Procedure for the election and designation of its 
members; 
(b) 
adopt, without prejudice to regulations adopted in accordance with 
Article 10, paragraph 2(c), and Article 33, paragraph 2(b), a Code of 
Conduct for the members and Chairmen of the Boards of Appeal and of the 
Enlarged Board of Appeal, which shall be subject to the approval of the 
Administrative Council; 
(c) 
advise the President of the Boards of Appeal on proposals for 
amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Boards of Appeal and of the 
Enlarged Board of Appeal; 
(d) 
advise the President of the Boards of Appeal on matters concerning 
the functioning of the Boards of Appeal Unit in general. 
(4)15, 16 Before the beginning of each working year, the Presidium, extended 
to include all Chairmen, shall allocate duties to the Boards of Appeal. In the 
same composition, it shall decide on conflicts regarding the allocation of 
duties between two or more Boards of Appeal. The extended Presidium 
shall designate the regular and alternate members of the various Boards of 
Appeal. Any member of a Board of Appeal may be designated as a 
member of more than one Board of Appeal. These measures may, where 
necessary, be amended during the course of the working year in question. 
(5) 
The Presidium may only take a decision if at least five of its members 
are present; these must include the President of the Boards of Appeal or 
his deputy, and the Chairmen of two Boards of Appeal. Where the tasks 
mentioned in paragraph 4 are concerned, nine members must be present, 
 

16 
including the President of the Boards of Appeal or his deputy, and the 
Chairmen of three Boards of Appeal. Decisions shall be taken by a majority 
vote; in the event of parity of votes, the Chairman or his deputy shall have 
the casting vote. Abstentions shall not be considered as votes. 
(6) 
The Administrative Council may allocate duties under Article 134a, 
paragraph 1(c), to the Boards of Appeal. 
Rule 12c
Boards of Appeal Committee and procedure for adoption of the Rules 
of Procedure of the Boards of Appeal and of the Enlarged Board of 
Appeal 
(1) 
The Administrative Council shall set up a committee (the "Boards of 
Appeal Committee") to advise it and the President of the Boards of Appeal 
on the Boards of Appeal Unit in general and to adopt the Rules of 
Procedure of the Boards of Appeal and of the Enlarged Board of Appeal. 
The Committee shall be composed of six members appointed by the 
Administrative Council, three from among the delegations of the 
Contracting States within the meaning of Article 26, and three from among 
serving or former judges of international or European courts or of national 
courts of the Contracting States. The President of the European Patent 
Office and the President of the Boards of Appeal shall have the right to 
attend the Committee's meetings. Further details, in particular as to the 
Committee's composition, alternate members, working arrangements and 
functions in advising the Boards of Appeal Unit, shall be determined by the 
Administrative Council in the decision setting up the Committee. 
(2)18 On a proposal from the President of the Boards of Appeal and after 
the President of the European Patent Office has been given the opportunity 
to comment, the Committee set up under paragraph 1 shall adopt the Rules 
of Procedure of the Boards of Appeal and of the Enlarged Board of Appeal. 
Rule 12d  
Appointment and re-appointment of the members, including the 
Chairmen, of the Boards of Appeal and of the Enlarged Board of 
Appeal 
(1) 
The Chairman of the Enlarged Board of Appeal shall, on his 
appointment, also be appointed as a legally qualified member of the Boards 
of Appeal. 
 
17 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 6/16 of 30.06.2016 (OJ EPO 
2016, A100), which entered into force on 01.07.2016. 
18 See Rules of Procedure of the Boards of Appeal, last amendments approved by 
decisions of the Administrative Council CA/D 5/19 Corr. 1 of 26.06.2019 (OJ EPO 
2019, A63) and CA/D 3/21 of 23.03.2021 (OJ EPO 2021, A19) and Rules of Procedure of 
the Enlarged Board of Appeal, last amendments approved by decision of the Administrative 
Council CA/D 3/15 of 25.03.2015 (OJ EPO 2015, A35). 
19 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 6/16 of 30.06.2016 (OJ EPO 
2016, A100), which entered into force on 01.07.2016. 
Art. 15, 21, 22, 23 
Art. 15, 21, 22, 23 


 
 
17 
(2)20 Upon delegation from the President of the European Patent Office, 
the President of the Boards of Appeal shall exercise the right to propose 
the members, including the Chairmen, of the Boards of Appeal and the 
members of the Enlarged Board of Appeal for appointment by the 
Administrative Council, and the right to be consulted on their 
re-appointment (Article 11, paragraph 3) and on the appointment and 
re-appointment of external legally qualified members (Article 11, paragraph 
5). 
(3) 
The President of the Boards of Appeal shall exercise the right under 
paragraph 2 to be consulted on re-appointments by submitting a reasoned 
opinion, including an evaluation of the member's or Chairman's 
performance, to the Administrative Council. The criteria for evaluating 
performance shall be set by the President of the Boards of Appeal in 
consultation with the Committee established under Rule 12c, paragraph 1. 
Subject to a positive opinion and performance evaluation and the number 
of posts under Article 11, paragraph 3, available in the adopted budget for 
the Boards of Appeal Unit, the members, including the Chairmen, of the 
Boards of Appeal and the members of the Enlarged Board of Appeal shall 
be re-appointed at the end of their five-year term under Article 23, 
paragraph 1. 
Rule 13 
Business distribution scheme for the Enlarged Board of Appeal 
Before the beginning of each working year, the members of the Enlarged 
Board of Appeal appointed under Article 11, paragraph 3, shall designate 
the regular and alternate members of the Enlarged Board of Appeal in 
proceedings under Article 22, paragraph 1(a) and (b), and the regular and 
alternate members in proceedings under Article 22, paragraph 1(c). 
Decisions may only be taken if at least five members are present, including 
the Chairman of the Enlarged Board of Appeal or his deputy; in the event of 
parity of votes, the Chairman or his deputy shall have the casting vote. 
Abstentions shall not be considered as votes. 
 
 
18 
PART II  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART II OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
Procedure where the applicant is not entitled 
Rule 14
Stay of proceedings 
(1) 
If a third party provides evidence that he has instituted proceedings 
against the applicant seeking a decision within the meaning of Article 61, 
paragraph 1, the proceedings for grant shall be stayed unless the third 
party communicates to the European Patent Office in writing his consent to 
the continuation of such proceedings. Such consent shall be irrevocable. 
However, proceedings for grant shall not be stayed before the publication 
of the European patent application. 
(2) 
Where evidence is provided that a final decision within the meaning of 
Article 61, paragraph 1, has been taken, the European Patent Office shall 
inform the applicant and any other party that the proceedings for grant shall 
be resumed as from the date stated in the communication, unless a new 
European patent application under Article 61, paragraph 1(b), has been 
filed for all the designated Contracting States. If the decision is in favour of 
the third party, the proceedings may not be resumed earlier than three 
months after the decision has become final, unless the third party requests 
the resumption. 
(3) 
Upon staying the proceedings for grant, or thereafter, the European 
Patent Office may set a date on which it intends to resume the proceedings 
for grant, regardless of the stage reached in the national proceedings 
instituted under paragraph 1. It shall communicate this date to the third 
party, the applicant and any other party. If no evidence has been provided 
by that date that a final decision has been taken, the European Patent 
Office may resume proceedings. 
(4) 
All periods, other than those for the payment of renewal fees, running 
at the date of the stay of proceedings shall be interrupted by such stay. The 
time which has not yet elapsed shall begin to run from the date on which 
proceedings are resumed. However, the time still to run after such 
resumption shall not be less than two months. 
Rule 15
Limitation on withdrawals  
From the date on which a third party provides evidence that he has 
instituted national proceedings under Rule 14, paragraph 1, and up to the 
date on which the proceedings for grant are resumed, neither the European 
patent application nor the designation of any Contracting State may be 
withdrawn. 

 
 
19 
Rule 16  
Procedure under Article 61, paragraph 1 
(1) 
A person entitled to the grant of a European patent may only avail 
himself of the remedies under Article 61, paragraph 1, if: 
(a) 
he does so no later than three months after the decision recognising 
his entitlement has become final, and 
(b) 
the European patent has not yet been granted. 
(2) 
Such remedies shall only apply in respect of Contracting States 
designated in the European patent application in which the decision has 
been taken or recognised or must be recognised on the basis of the 
Protocol on Recognition. 
Rule 17
Filing of a new European patent application by the entitled person 
(1) 
Where the person adjudged by a final decision to be entitled to the 
grant of the European patent files a new European patent application under 
Article 61, paragraph 1(b), the original application shall be deemed to be 
withdrawn on the date of filing the new application for the Contracting 
States designated therein in which the decision has been taken or recog-
nised or must be recognised on the basis of the Protocol on Recognition. 
(2) 
The filing fee and search fee shall be paid within one month of filing 
the new application. If the filing fee or search fee is not paid in due time, the 
application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
(3)27 The designation fee shall be paid within six months of the date on 
which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the 
European search report drawn up in respect of the new application. Rule 
39, paragraphs 2 and 3, shall apply. 
Rule 18
Partial transfer of the right to the European patent 
(1) 
If a final decision determines that a third party is entitled to the grant 
of a European patent in respect of only part of the subject-matter disclosed 
in the original European patent application, Article 61 and Rules 16 and 17 
shall apply to such part. 
(2) 
Where appropriate, the original European patent application shall 
contain, for the designated Contracting States in which the decision was 
taken or recognised or must be recognised on the basis of the Protocol on 
Recognition, claims, a description and drawings which are different from 
those for the other designated Contracting States. 

20 
Chapter II  
Mention of the inventor 
Rule 19  
Designation of the inventor29 
(1) 
The request for grant of a European patent shall contain the 
designation of the inventor. However, if the applicant is not the inventor or 
is not the sole inventor, the designation shall be filed in a separate 
document. The designation shall state the family name, given names and 
country and place of residence of the inventor, contain the statement 
referred to in Article 81 and bear the signature of the applicant or his 
representative. 
(2) 
The European Patent Office shall not verify the accuracy of the 
designation of the inventor. 
Rule 20  
Publication of the mention of the inventor 
(1) 
The designated inventor shall be mentioned in the published 
European patent application and the European patent specification, unless 
he informs the European Patent Office in writing that he has waived his 
right to be thus mentioned. 
(2) 
Paragraph 1 shall apply where a third party files with the European 
Patent Office a final decision determining that the applicant for or proprietor 
of a European patent is required to designate him as an inventor. 
Rule 21
Rectification of the designation of an inventor 
(1) 
An incorrect designation of an inventor shall be rectified upon request 
and only with the consent of the wrongly designated person and, where 
such a request is filed by a third party, the consent of the applicant for or 
proprietor of the patent. Rule 19 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
(2) 
Where an incorrect designation of the inventor has been recorded in 
the European Patent Register or published in the European Patent Bulletin, 
its rectification or cancellation shall also be recorded or published therein.  

 
 
21 
Chapter III  
Registration of transfers, licences and other rights 
Rule 22
Registration of transfers 
(1) 
The transfer of a European patent application shall be recorded in the 
European Patent Register at the request of an interested party, upon 
production of documents providing evidence of such transfer. 
(2) 
The request shall not be deemed to have been filed until an 
administrative fee has been paid. It may be rejected only if paragraph 1 has 
not been complied with. 
(3) 
A transfer shall have effect vis-à-vis the European Patent Office only 
at the date when and to the extent that the documents referred to in 
paragraph 1 have been produced. 
Rule 23
  
Registration of licences and other rights 
(1) 
Rule 22, paragraphs 1 and 2, shall apply mutatis mutandis to the 
registration of the grant or transfer of a licence, the establishment or 
transfer of a right in rem in respect of a European patent application and 
any legal means of execution affecting such an application. 
(2) 
A registration under paragraph 1 shall be cancelled upon request, 
supported by documents providing evidence that the right has lapsed, or by 
the written consent of the proprietor of the right to the cancellation of the 
registration. Rule 22, paragraph 2, shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
Rule 24 
Special entries for licence registrations 
A licence in respect of a European patent application shall be recorded  
(a) 
as an exclusive licence if the applicant and the licensee so request; 
(b) 
as a sub-licence where it is granted by a licensee whose licence is 
recorded in the European Patent Register. 
 
 
22 
Chapter IV  
Certificate of exhibition 
Rule 25
Certificate of exhibition 
Within four months of filing the European patent application, the applicant 
shall file the certificate referred to in Article 55, paragraph 2, which: 
(a) 
is issued at the exhibition by the authority responsible for the 
protection of industrial property at that exhibition; 
(b) 
states that the invention was in fact displayed there; 
(c) 
states the opening date of the exhibition and, where the invention was 
disclosed later than on that date, the date on which the invention was first 
disclosed; and  
(d) 
is accompanied by an identification of the invention, duly 
authenticated by the above-mentioned authority. 
Chapter V  
Biotechnological inventions 
Rule 26 
General and definitions 
(1) 
For 
European 
patent 
applications 
and 
patents 
concerning 
biotechnological inventions, the relevant provisions of the Convention shall 
be applied and interpreted in accordance with the provisions of this 
Chapter. Directive 98/44/EC of 6 July 199836 on the legal protection of 
biotechnological inventions shall be used as a supplementary means of 
interpretation. 
(2) 
"Biotechnological inventions" are inventions which concern a product 
consisting of or containing biological material or a process by means of 
which biological material is produced, processed or used. 
(3) 
"Biological material" means any material containing genetic 
information and capable of reproducing itself or being reproduced in a 
biological system. 
(4) 
"Plant variety" means any plant grouping within a single botanical 
taxon of the lowest known rank, which grouping, irrespective of whether the 
conditions for the grant of a plant variety right are fully met, can be: 
(a) 
defined by the expression of the characteristics that results from a 
given genotype or combination of genotypes,  
(b) 
distinguished from any other plant grouping by the expression of at 
least one of the said characteristics, and 
 
34 See decisions of the Enlarged Board of Appeal G 3/98, G 2/99 (Annex I). 
35 See decisions of the Enlarged Board of Appeal G 1/98, G 2/06, G 2/07, G 1/08 (Annex I). 
36 See OJ EPO 1999, 101. 
R. 159 
Art. 52, 53  
R. 31, 32, 33, 34 


 
 
23 
(c) 
considered as a unit with regard to its suitability for being propagated 
unchanged. 
(5) 
A process for the production of plants or animals is essentially 
biological if it consists entirely of natural phenomena such as crossing or 
selection. 
(6) 
"Microbiological process" means any process involving or performed 
upon or resulting in microbiological material. 
Rule 27  
Patentable biotechnological inventions 
Biotechnological inventions shall also be patentable if they concern: 
(a) 
biological material which is isolated from its natural environment or 
produced by means of a technical process even if it previously occurred in 
nature; 
(b)37 without prejudice to Rule 28, paragraph 2, plants or animals if the 
technical feasibility of the invention is not confined to a particular plant or 
animal variety; 
(c)38 a microbiological or other technical process, or a product obtained by 
means of such a process other than a plant or animal variety. 
Rule 28
Exceptions to patentability 
(1) 
Under Article 53(a), European patents shall not be granted in respect 
of biotechnological inventions which, in particular, concern the following: 
(a) 
processes for cloning human beings; 
(b) 
processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human 
beings; 
(c)40 uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes; 
(d) 
processes for modifying the genetic identity of animals which are 
likely to cause them suffering without any substantial medical benefit to 
man or animal, and also animals resulting from such processes. 
 
24 
(2)41 Under Article 53(b), European patents shall not be granted in respect 
of plants or animals exclusively obtained by means of an essentially 
biological process. 
Rule 29  
The human body and its elements 
(1) 
The human body, at the various stages of its formation and 
development, and the simple discovery of one of its elements, including the 
sequence or partial sequence of a gene, cannot constitute patentable 
inventions. 
(2) 
An element isolated from the human body or otherwise produced by 
means of a technical process, including the sequence or partial sequence 
of a gene, may constitute a patentable invention, even if the structure of 
that element is identical to that of a natural element. 
(3) 
The industrial application of a sequence or a partial sequence of a 
gene must be disclosed in the patent application. 
Rule 30  
Requirements of European patent applications relating to nucleotide 
and amino acid sequences 
(1) 
If nucleotide or amino acid sequences are disclosed in the European 
patent application, the description shall contain a sequence listing 
conforming to the rules laid down by the President of the European Patent 
Office for the standardised representation of nucleotide and amino acid 
sequences. 
(2) 
A sequence listing filed after the date of filing shall not form part of the 
description. 
(3) 
Where the applicant has not filed a sequence listing complying with 
the requirements under paragraph 1 at the date of filing, the European 
Patent Office shall invite the applicant to furnish such a sequence listing 
and pay the late furnishing fee. If the applicant does not furnish the required 
sequence listing and pay the required late furnishing fee within a period of 
two months after such an invitation, the application shall be refused. 
 

25 
Rule 31  
Deposit of biological material 
(1) 
If an invention involves the use of or concerns biological material 
which is not available to the public and which cannot be described in the 
European patent application in such a manner as to enable the invention to 
be carried out by a person skilled in the art, the invention shall only be 
regarded as being disclosed as prescribed in Article 83 if: 
(a) 
a sample of the biological material has been deposited with a 
recognised depositary institution on the same terms as those laid down in 
the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of 
Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure of 28 April 1977 not 
later than the date of filing of the application; 
(b) 
the application as filed gives such relevant information as is available 
to the applicant on the characteristics of the biological material; 
(c) 
the depositary institution and the accession number of the deposited 
biological material are stated in the application, and 
(d) 
where the biological material has been deposited by a person other 
than the applicant, the name and address of the depositor are stated in the 
application and a document is submitted to the European Patent Office 
providing evidence that the depositor has authorised the applicant to refer 
to the deposited biological material in the application and has given his 
unreserved and irrevocable consent to the deposited material being made 
available to the public in accordance with Rule 33. 
(2) 
The information referred to in paragraph 1(c) and (d) may be 
submitted 
(a) 
within sixteen months after the date of filing of the application or, if 
priority has been claimed, after the priority date, this period being deemed 
to have been observed if the information is communicated before 
completion of the technical preparations for publication of the European 
patent application; 
(b) 
up to the date of submission of a request under Article 93, 
paragraph 1(b); 
(c) 
within one month after the European Patent Office has communicated 
to the applicant that the right to inspect the files under Article 128, 
paragraph 2, exists. 
The ruling period shall be the one which is the first to expire. The 
communication of this information shall be considered as constituting the 
unreserved and irrevocable consent of the applicant to the deposited 
biological material being made available to the public in accordance with 
Rule 33. 
 

 
26 
Rule 32  
Expert solution 
(1) 
Until completion of the technical preparations for publication of the 
European patent application, the applicant may inform the European Patent 
Office that, 
(a) 
until the publication of the mention of the grant of the European 
patent or, where applicable, 
(b) 
for twenty years from the date of filing, if the application is refused or 
withdrawn or deemed to be withdrawn,  
the availability referred to in Rule 33 shall be effected only by the issue of a 
sample to an independent expert nominated by the requester. 
(2) 
Any natural person may be nominated as an expert, provided that he 
complies with the requirements and obligations laid down by the President 
of the European Patent Office. 
The nomination shall be accompanied by a declaration from the expert that 
he undertakes to comply with the aforementioned requirements and 
obligations and that he knows of no circumstances which might give rise to 
justified doubts as to his independence or which might conflict in any other 
way with his function as expert. 
The nomination shall also be accompanied by a declaration from the expert 
vis-à-vis the applicant in which he enters into the undertaking given under 
Rule 33 until either the date on which the patent expires in all the 
designated States or, where the application is refused, withdrawn or 
deemed to be withdrawn, the date referred to in paragraph 1(b), the 
requester being regarded as a third party. 
Rule 33  
Availability of biological material 
(1) 
Biological material deposited in accordance with Rule 31 shall be 
available upon request to any person from the date of publication of the 
European patent application and to any person having the right to inspect 
the files under Article 128, paragraph 2, prior to that date. Subject to 
Rule 32, such availability shall be effected by the issue of a sample of the 
biological material to the person making the request (hereinafter referred to 
as "the requester"). 
(2) 
Said issue shall be made only if the requester has undertaken 
vis-à-vis the applicant for or proprietor of the patent not to make the 
 
 

27 
biological material or any biological material derived therefrom available to 
any third party and to use that material for experimental purposes only, until 
such time as the patent application is refused or withdrawn or deemed to 
be withdrawn, or before the European patent has expired in all the 
designated States, unless the applicant for or proprietor of the patent 
expressly waives such an undertaking. 
The undertaking to use the biological material for experimental purposes 
only shall not apply in so far as the requester is using that material under a 
compulsory licence. The term "compulsory licence" shall be construed as 
including ex officio licences and the right to use patented inventions in the 
public interest. 
(3) 
For the purposes of paragraph 2, derived biological material shall 
mean any material which still exhibits those characteristics of the deposited 
material which are essential to carrying out the invention. The undertaking 
under paragraph 2 shall not impede any deposit of derived biological 
material necessary for the purpose of patent procedure. 
(4) 
The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the 
European Patent Office on a form recognised by that Office. The European 
Patent Office shall certify on the form that a European patent application 
referring to the deposit of the biological material has been filed, and that the 
requester or the expert nominated by him under Rule 32 is entitled to the 
issue of a sample of that material. After grant of the European patent, the 
request shall also be submitted to the European Patent Office.  
(5) 
The European Patent Office shall transmit a copy of the request, with 
the certification provided for in paragraph 4, to the depositary institution and 
to the applicant for or the proprietor of the patent.  
(6)48 The European Patent Office shall publish in its Official Journal the list 
of depositary institutions recognised for the purpose of Rules 31, 33 and 
34. 
Rule 34  
New deposit of biological material 
If biological material deposited in accordance with Rule 31 ceases to be 
available from the recognised depositary institution, an interruption in 
availability shall be deemed not to have occurred if a new deposit of that 
material is made with a recognised depositary institution on the same terms 
as those laid down in the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition 
of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure 
of 28 April 1977, and if a copy of the receipt of the new deposit issued by 
the depositary institution is forwarded to the European Patent Office within 
four months of the date of the new deposit, stating the number of the 
European patent application or of the European patent. 
 

 
28 
PART III  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART III OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
Filing of the European patent application 
Rule 35
General provisions 
(1) 
European patent applications may be filed in writing with the 
European Patent Office in Munich, The Hague or Berlin, or the authorities 
referred to in Article 75, paragraph 1(b).  
(2) 
The authority with which the European patent application is filed shall 
mark the documents making up the application with the date of their 
receipt, and issue without delay a receipt to the applicant including at least 
the application number and the nature, number and date of receipt of the 
documents. 
(3) 
If the European patent application is filed with an authority referred to 
in Article 75, paragraph 1(b), such authority shall without delay inform the 
European Patent Office of the receipt of the application, and, in particular, 
of the nature and date of receipt of the documents, the application number 
and any priority date claimed. 
(4) 
Upon receipt of a European patent application forwarded by the 
central industrial property office of a Contracting State, the European 
Patent Office shall inform the applicant accordingly, indicating the date of 
its receipt. 
Rule 36
European divisional applications 
(1)52, 53 The applicant may file a divisional application relating to any 
pending earlier European patent application. 
 
50 See decisions of the President of the EPO of 12.07.2007 concerning the filing of patent 
applications and other documents by facsimile (Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, A.3) 
and concerning the electronic signatures, data carriers and software to be used for the 
electronic filing of patent applications and other documents (Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 
2007, A.5). 
 
 
29 
(2)54 A divisional application shall be filed in the language of the 
proceedings for the earlier application. If the latter was not in an official lan-
guage of the European Patent Office, the divisional application may be filed 
in the language of the earlier application; a translation into the language of 
the proceedings for the earlier application shall then be filed within two 
months of the filing of the divisional application. The divisional application 
shall be filed with the European Patent Office in Munich, The Hague or 
Berlin. 
(3) 
The filing fee and search fee shall be paid within one month of filing 
the divisional application. If the filing fee or search fee is not paid in due 
time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
(4)55 The designation fee shall be paid within six months of the date on 
which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the 
European search report drawn up in respect of the divisional application. 
Rule 39, paragraphs 2 and 3, shall apply. 
Rule 37  
Forwarding of European patent applications 
(1) 
The central industrial property office of a Contracting State shall 
forward European patent applications to the European Patent Office in the 
shortest time compatible with its national law relating to the secrecy of 
inventions in the interests of the State, and shall take all appropriate steps 
to ensure such forwarding within: 
(a) 
six weeks of filing, where the subject of the application is evidently not 
liable to secrecy under the national law; or 
(b) 
four months of filing or, if priority has been claimed, fourteen months 
of the date of priority, where the application requires further examination as 
to its liability to secrecy. 
(2) 
A European patent application not received by the European Patent 
Office within fourteen months of filing or, if priority has been claimed, of the 
date of priority, shall be deemed to be withdrawn. Any fees paid in respect 
of this application shall be refunded. 
Rule 38  
Filing fee and search fee 
(1)57 The filing fee and search fee shall be paid within one month of filing 
the European patent application. 
 
30 
(2) 
The Rules relating to Fees may provide for an additional fee as part 
of the filing fee if the application comprises more than 35 pages. 
(3) 
The additional fee referred to in paragraph 2 shall be paid within one 
month of filing the European patent application or one month of filing the 
first set of claims or one month of filing the certified copy referred to in Rule 
40, paragraph 3, whichever period expires last. 
(4)58 The Rules relating to Fees may provide for an additional fee as part 
of the filing fee in the case of a divisional application filed in respect of any 
earlier application which is itself a divisional application. 
Rule 39
Designation fees 
(1) 
The designation fee shall be paid within six months of the date on 
which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the 
European search report. 
(2)60 Where the designation fee is not paid in due time or the designations 
of all the Contracting States are withdrawn, the European patent application 
shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
(3) 
Without prejudice to Rule 37, paragraph 2, second sentence, the 
designation fee shall not be refunded. 
Rule 40
Date of filing 
(1) 
The date of filing of a European patent application shall be the date 
on which the documents filed by the applicant contain: 
(a) 
an indication that a European patent is sought; 
(b) 
information identifying the applicant or allowing the applicant to be 
contacted; and 
(c) 
a description or reference to a previously filed application. 
(2) 
A reference to a previously filed application under paragraph 1(c) 
shall state the filing date and number of that application and the Office with 
which it was filed. Such reference shall indicate that it replaces the 
description and any drawings.  
 
58 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 15/13 of 16.10.2013 (OJ EPO 
2013, 501), which entered into force on 01.04.2014. 

 
31 
(3) 
Where the application contains a reference under paragraph 2, a 
certified copy of the previously filed application shall be filed within two 
months of filing the application. Where the previously filed application is not 
in an official language of the European Patent Office, a translation thereof 
in one of these languages shall be filed within the same period. Rule 53, 
paragraph 2, shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
Chapter II  
Provisions governing the application 
Rule 41
Request for grant 
(1) 
The request for grant of a European patent shall be filed on a form 
drawn up by the European Patent Office. 
(2) 
The request shall contain: 
(a) 
a petition for the grant of a European patent; 
(b) 
the title of the invention, which shall clearly and concisely state the 
technical designation of the invention and shall exclude all fancy names; 
(c)63 the name, address and nationality of the applicant and the State in 
which his residence or principal place of business is located. Names of 
natural persons shall be indicated by the person's family name, followed by 
his given names. Names of legal persons, as well as of bodies equivalent 
to legal persons under the law governing them, shall be indicated by their 
official designations. Addresses shall be indicated in accordance with 
applicable customary requirements for prompt postal delivery and shall 
comprise all the relevant administrative units, including the house number, 
if any. It is recommended that the fax and telephone numbers be indicated; 
(d) 
if the applicant has appointed a representative, his name and the 
address of his place of business as prescribed in sub-paragraph (c); 
(e) 
where appropriate, an indication that the application constitutes a 
divisional application and the number of the earlier European patent 
application; 
(f) 
in cases covered by Article 61, paragraph 1(b), the number of the 
original European patent application; 
(g) 
where applicable, a declaration claiming the priority of an earlier 
application and indicating the date on which and the country in or for which 
the earlier application was filed; 
(h) 
the signature of the applicant or his representative; 
(i) 
a list of the documents accompanying the request. This list shall also 
indicate the number of sheets of the description, claims, drawings and 
abstract filed with the request; 
 

 
 
32 
(j) 
the designation of the inventor, where the applicant is the inventor. 
(3) 
If there is more than one applicant, the request shall preferably 
contain the appointment of one applicant or representative as common 
representative.
Rule 42
Content of the description 
(1) 
The description shall: 
(a) 
specify the technical field to which the invention relates; 
(b) 
indicate the background art which, as far as is known to the applicant, 
can be regarded as useful to understand the invention, draw up the 
European search report and examine the European patent application, and, 
preferably, cite the documents reflecting such art; 
(c) 
disclose the invention, as claimed, in such terms that the technical 
problem, even if not expressly stated as such, and its solution can be 
understood, and state any advantageous effects of the invention with 
reference to the background art;  
(d) 
briefly describe the figures in the drawings, if any; 
(e) 
describe in detail at least one way of carrying out the invention 
claimed, using examples where appropriate and referring to the drawings, if 
any; 
(f) 
indicate explicitly, when it is not obvious from the description or 
nature of the invention, the way in which the invention is industrially 
applicable. 
(2) 
The description shall be presented in the manner and order specified 
in paragraph 1, unless, owing to the nature of the invention, a different 
presentation would afford a better understanding or be more concise. 
Rule 43
Form and content of claims 
(1) 
The claims shall define the matter for which protection is sought in 
terms of the technical features of the invention. Wherever appropriate, 
claims shall contain: 
(a) 
a statement indicating the designation of the subject-matter of the 
invention and those technical features which are necessary for the 
definition of the claimed subject-matter but which, in combination, form part 
of the prior art; 
(b) 
a characterising portion, beginning with the expression "characterised 
in that" or "characterised by" and specifying the technical features for 
 
64 See decisions of the Enlarged Board of Appeal G 1/03, G 2/03 (Annex I). 
65 See decisions of the Enlarged Board of Appeal G 2/03, G 1/04 (Annex I). 
Art. 54, 56, 57, 78, 
80, 83  
R. 29, 30, 48, 50 
Art. 78, 80, 82, 84  
R. 50 


 
 
33 
which, in combination with the features stated under sub-paragraph (a), 
protection is sought. 
(2) 
Without prejudice to Article 82, a European patent application may 
contain more than one independent claim in the same category (product, 
process, apparatus or use) only if the subject-matter of the application 
involves one of the following: 
(a) 
a plurality of interrelated products, 
(b) 
different uses of a product or apparatus, 
(c) 
alternative solutions to a particular problem, where it is inappropriate 
to cover these alternatives by a single claim. 
(3) 
Any claim stating the essential features of an invention may be 
followed by one or more claims concerning particular embodiments of that 
invention. 
(4) 
Any claim which includes all the features of any other claim 
(dependent claim) shall contain, if possible at the beginning, a reference to 
the other claim and then state the additional features. A dependent claim 
directly referring to another dependent claim shall also be admissible. All 
dependent claims referring back to a single previous claim, and all 
dependent claims referring back to several previous claims, shall be 
grouped together to the extent and in the most appropriate way possible. 
(5) 
The number of claims shall be reasonable with regard to the nature of 
the invention claimed. The claims shall be numbered consecutively in 
Arabic numerals. 
(6) 
Except where absolutely necessary, claims shall not rely on 
references to the description or drawings in specifying the technical 
features of the invention. In particular, they shall not contain such 
expressions as "as described in part ... of the description", or "as illustrated 
in figure ... of the drawings". 
(7) 
Where the European patent application contains drawings including 
reference signs, the technical features specified in the claims shall 
preferably be followed by such reference signs relating to these features, 
placed in parentheses, if the intelligibility of the claim can thereby be 
increased. These reference signs shall not be construed as limiting the 
claim. 
Rule 44  
Unity of invention 
(1) 
Where a group of inventions is claimed in a European patent 
application, the requirement of unity of invention under Article 82 shall be 
fulfilled only when there is a technical relationship among those inventions 
involving one or more of the same or corresponding special technical 
features. The expression "special technical features" shall mean those 
features which define a contribution which each of the claimed inventions 
considered as a whole makes over the prior art. 
Art. 78 


 
 
34 
(2) 
The determination whether a group of inventions is so linked as to 
form a single general inventive concept shall be made without regard to 
whether the inventions are claimed in separate claims or as alternatives 
within a single claim. 
Rule 45  
Claims incurring fees 
(1)66 Any European patent application comprising more than fifteen claims 
shall, in respect of the sixteenth and each subsequent claim, incur payment 
of claims fees as laid down in the Rules relating to Fees.  
(2) 
The claims fees shall be paid within one month of filing the first set of 
claims. If the claims fees have not been paid in due time, they may still be 
paid within one month of a communication concerning the failure to observe 
the time limit. 
(3) 
If a claims fee is not paid in due time, the claim concerned shall be 
deemed to be abandoned. 
Rule 46
 
(deleted) 
Rule 47  
Form and content of the abstract 
(1) 
The abstract shall indicate the title of the invention. 
(2) 
The abstract shall contain a concise summary of the disclosure as 
contained in the description, the claims and any drawings. The summary 
shall indicate the technical field to which the invention pertains, and shall be 
drafted in a manner allowing the clear understanding of the technical 
problem, the gist of the solution of that problem through the invention, and 
the principal use or uses of the invention. The abstract shall, where 
applicable, contain the chemical formula which, among those contained in 
the application, best characterises the invention. It shall not contain 
statements on the alleged merits or value of the invention or on speculative 
applications thereof.  
(3) 
The abstract shall preferably not contain more than one hundred and 
fifty words. 
(4) 
If the European patent application contains drawings, the applicant 
shall indicate the figure or, exceptionally, the figures of the drawings which 
should be published with the abstract. The European Patent Office may 
decide to publish one or more other figures if it considers that they better 
characterise the invention. Each essential feature mentioned in the abstract 
and illustrated by a drawing shall be followed by a reference sign placed in 
parentheses. 
 
 
35 
(5) 
The abstract shall be drafted in such a manner as to constitute an 
efficient instrument for the purpose of searching in the particular technical 
field. In particular, it shall make it possible to assess whether consultation 
of the European patent application itself is necessary. 
Rule 48  
Prohibited matter 
(1) 
The European patent application shall not contain: 
(a) 
statements or other matter contrary to "ordre public" or morality; 
(b) 
statements disparaging the products or processes of any third party 
or the merits or validity of the applications or patents of any such party. 
Mere comparisons with the prior art shall not be considered disparaging per 
se; 
(c) 
any statement or other matter obviously irrelevant or unnecessary 
under the circumstances. 
(2) 
If the application contains matter prohibited under paragraph 1(a), the 
European Patent Office may omit such matter from the application as 
published, indicating the place and number of words or drawings omitted. 
(3) 
If the application contains statements referred to in paragraph 1(b), 
the European Patent Office may omit them from the application as 
published, indicating the place and number of words omitted. Upon request, 
the European Patent Office shall furnish a copy of the passages omitted. 
Rule 49
Presentation of the application documents 
(1) 
Any translation filed under Article 14, paragraph 2, or Rule 40, 
paragraph 3, shall be deemed to be a document making up the European 
patent application. 
(2)69 The President of the European Patent Office shall determine the 
presentation requirements of documents making up the application. 
Rule 50
Documents filed subsequently 
(1)71 Rules 42, 43 and 47 to 49 shall apply to documents replacing 
documents making up the European patent application. Rule 49, 
 


 
 
36 
paragraph 2, shall also apply to the translation of the claims referred to in 
Rule 71. 
(2)72 The President of the European Patent Office shall determine the 
presentation requirements of all documents other than those making up the 
application. 
(3) 
Documents filed after filing the application shall be signed, with the 
exception of annexed documents. If a document has not been signed, the 
European Patent Office shall invite the party concerned to do so within a 
time limit to be specified. If signed in due time, the document shall retain its 
original date of receipt; otherwise it shall be deemed not to have been filed. 
Chapter III  
Renewal fees 
Rule 51  
Payment of renewal fees 
(1)73 A renewal fee for the European patent application in respect of the 
coming year shall be due on the last day of the month containing the 
anniversary of the date of filing of the European patent application. The 
renewal fee in respect of the third year may not be validly paid more than 
six months before it falls due. All other renewal fees may not be validly paid 
more than three months before they fall due. 
(2)74 If a renewal fee is not paid on the due date under paragraph 1, the 
fee may still be paid within six months of the said date, provided that an 
additional fee is also paid within that period. The legal consequence laid 
down in Article 86, paragraph 1, shall ensue upon expiry of the six-month 
period. 
(3) 
Renewal fees already due in respect of an earlier application at the 
date on which a divisional application is filed shall also be paid for the 
divisional application and shall be due on its filing. These fees and any 
renewal fee due within four months of filing the divisional application may 
be paid within that period without an additional fee. Paragraph 2 shall 
apply. 
 

 
37 
(4) 
If a European patent application has been refused or deemed to be 
withdrawn as a result of non-observance of a time limit, and if the 
applicant's rights are re-established under Article 122, a renewal fee 
(a) 
which would have fallen due under paragraph 1 in the period starting 
on the date on which the loss of rights occurred, up to and including the 
date of the notification of the decision re-establishing the rights, shall be 
due on that latter date. 
This fee and any renewal fee due within four months from that latter date 
may still be paid within four months of that latter date without an additional 
fee. Paragraph 2 shall apply. 
(b) 
which, on the date on which the loss of rights has occurred, was 
already due but the period provided for in paragraph 2 has not yet expired, 
may still be paid within six months from the date of the notification of the 
decision re-establishing the rights, provided that the additional fee pursuant 
to paragraph 2 is also paid within that period. 
(5) 
If the Enlarged Board of Appeal re-opens proceedings before the 
Board of Appeal under Article 112a, paragraph 5, second sentence, a 
renewal fee 
(a) 
which would have fallen due under paragraph 1 in the period starting 
on the date when the decision of the Board of Appeal subject to the petition 
for review was taken, up to and including the date of the notification of the 
decision of the Enlarged Board of Appeal re-opening proceedings before 
the Board of Appeal, shall be due on that latter date.  
This fee and any renewal fee due within four months from that latter date 
may still be paid within four months of that latter date without an additional 
fee. Paragraph 2 shall apply. 
(b) 
which, on the day on which the decision of the Board of Appeal was 
taken, was already due but the period provided for in paragraph 2 has not 
yet expired, may still be paid within six months from the date of the 
notification of the decision of the Enlarged Board of Appeal re-opening 
proceedings before the Board of Appeal, provided that the additional fee 
pursuant to paragraph 2 is also paid within that period. 
(6) 
A renewal fee shall not be payable for a new European patent 
application filed under Article 61, paragraph 1(b), in respect of the year in 
which it was filed and any preceding year. 
Chapter IV  
Priority 
Rule 52  
Declaration of priority  
(1) 
The declaration of priority referred to in Article 88, paragraph 1, shall 
indicate the date of the previous filing, the State party to the Paris 
Convention or Member of the World Trade Organization in or for which it 
was made and the file number. In the case referred to in Article 87, 
paragraph 5, the first sentence shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
Art. 98, 103, 105c  
R. 41, 57-59, 68, 
163 


 
 
38 
(2) 
The declaration of priority shall preferably be made on filing the 
European patent application. It may still be made within sixteen months 
from the earliest priority date claimed. 
(3) 
The applicant may correct the declaration of priority within sixteen 
months from the earliest priority date claimed, or, where the correction 
would cause a change in the earliest priority date claimed, within sixteen 
months from the corrected earliest priority date, whichever sixteen-month 
period expires first, provided that such a correction may be submitted until 
the expiry of four months from the date of filing accorded to the European 
patent application. 
(4) 
However, a declaration of priority may not be made or corrected after 
a request under Article 93, paragraph 1(b), has been filed. 
(5) 
The particulars of the declaration of priority shall appear in the 
published European patent application and the European patent 
specification. 
Rule 53  
Priority documents 
(1) 
An applicant claiming priority shall file a copy of the previous 
application within sixteen months of the earliest priority date claimed. This 
copy and the date of filing of the previous application shall be certified as 
correct by the authority with which that application was filed. 
(2)75 The copy of the previous application shall be deemed to be duly filed 
if a copy of that application available to the European Patent Office is to be 
included in the file of the European patent application under the conditions 
determined by the President of the European Patent Office. 
(3)76 Where the previous application is not in an official language of the 
European Patent Office and the validity of the priority claim is relevant to 
the determination of the patentability of the invention concerned, the 
European Patent Office shall invite the applicant for or proprietor of the 
European patent to file a translation of that application into one of the 
official languages within a period to be specified. Alternatively, a declaration 
may be submitted that the European patent application is a complete 
translation of the previous application. Paragraph 2 shall apply mutatis 
mutandis. If a requested translation of a previous application is not filed in 
due time, the right of priority for the European patent application or for the 
European patent with respect to that application shall be lost. The applicant 
for or proprietor of the European patent shall be informed accordingly. 
 

 
39 
Rule 54
Issuing priority documents 
On request, the European Patent Office shall issue to the applicant a 
certified copy of the European patent application (priority document), under 
the conditions determined by the President of the European Patent Office, 
including the form of the priority document and the circumstances under 
which an administrative fee shall be paid. 
 


 
 
40 
PART IV  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART IV OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
Examination by the Receiving Section 
Rule 55  
Examination on filing 
If the examination under Article 90, paragraph 1, reveals that the 
application fails to meet the requirements laid down in Rule 40, 
paragraph 1(a) or (c), paragraph 2 or paragraph 3, first sentence, the Euro-
pean Patent Office shall inform the applicant of any deficiencies and advise 
him that the application will not be dealt with as a European patent 
application unless such deficiencies are remedied within two months. If the 
applicant does this, he shall be informed of the date of filing accorded by 
the Office. 
Rule 56  
Missing parts of the description or missing drawings 
(1) 
If the examination under Article 90, paragraph 1, reveals that parts of 
the description, or drawings referred to in the description or in the claims, 
appear to be missing, the European Patent Office shall invite the applicant 
to file the missing parts within two months. The applicant may not invoke 
the omission of such a communication. 
(2)78 If missing parts of the description or missing drawings are filed later 
than the date of filing, but within two months of the date of filing or, if a 
communication is issued under paragraph 1 or under Rule 56a, 
paragraph 1, within two months of that communication, the application shall 
be re-dated to the date on which the missing parts of the description or 
missing drawings were filed. The European Patent Office shall inform the 
applicant accordingly. 
(3)79 If the missing parts of the description or missing drawings are filed 
within the period under paragraph 2, and the application claims priority of 
an earlier application on the date on which the requirements laid down in 
Rule 40, paragraph 1, were fulfilled, the date of filing shall, provided that the 
missing parts of the description or the missing drawings are completely 
contained in the earlier application, remain the date on which the 
requirements laid down in Rule 40, paragraph 1, were fulfilled, where the 
applicant so requests and files, within the period under paragraph 2: 
(a) 
a copy of the earlier application, unless such copy is available to the 
European Patent Office under Rule 53, paragraph 2; 
(b) 
where the earlier application is not in an official language of the 
European Patent Office, a translation thereof in one of these languages, 
 
 
 
41 
unless such copy is available to the European Patent Office under Rule 53, 
paragraph 3; and  
(c) 
an indication as to where the missing parts of the description or the 
missing drawings are completely contained in the earlier application and, 
where applicable, in the translation thereof.  
(4) 
If the applicant: 
(a) 
fails to file the missing parts of the description or the missing 
drawings within the period under paragraph 1 or 2, 
or  
(b) 
withdraws under paragraph 6 any missing part of the description or 
missing drawing filed under paragraph 2,  
any references referred to in paragraph 1 shall be deemed to be deleted, 
and any filing of the missing parts of the description or missing drawings 
shall be deemed not to have been made. The European Patent Office shall 
inform the applicant accordingly.  
(5) 
If the applicant fails to comply with the requirements referred to in 
paragraph 3(a) to (c) within the period under paragraph 2, the application 
shall be re-dated to the date on which the missing parts of the description 
or missing drawings were filed. The European Patent Office shall inform the 
applicant accordingly.  
(6) 
Within one month of the notification referred to in paragraph 2 or 5, 
last sentence, the applicant may withdraw the missing parts of the 
description or the missing drawings filed, in which case the re-dating shall 
be deemed not to have been made. The European Patent Office shall 
inform the applicant accordingly.  
Rule 56a
Erroneously filed application documents or parts 
(1) 
If the examination under Article 90, paragraph 1, reveals that the 
description, claims or drawings, or parts of those application documents, 
appear to have been erroneously filed, the European Patent Office shall 
invite the applicant to file the correct application documents or parts within 
two months. The applicant may not invoke the omission of such a 
communication. 
(2) 
If correct application documents or parts referred to in paragraph 1 
are filed on or before the date of filing so as to correct the application, those 
correct application documents or parts shall be included in the application 
and the erroneously filed application documents or parts shall be deemed 
not to have been filed. The European Patent Office shall inform the 
applicant accordingly. 
 
80 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 2/21 of 14.12.2021 (OJ EPO 
2022, A3), which entered into force on 01.11.2022. 
 


 
 
42 
(3) 
If correct application documents or parts referred to in paragraph 1 
are filed later than the date of filing, but within two months of the date of 
filing or, if a communication is issued under paragraph 1 or under Rule 56, 
paragraph 1, within two months of that communication, the application shall 
be re-dated to the date on which the correct application documents or parts 
were filed. The correct application documents or parts shall be included in 
the application and the erroneously filed application documents or parts 
shall be deemed not to have been filed. The European Patent Office shall 
inform the applicant accordingly. 
(4) 
If the correct application documents or parts are filed within the period 
under paragraph 3, and the application claims priority of an earlier 
application on the date on which the requirements laid down in Rule 40, 
paragraph 1, were fulfilled, the date of filing shall, provided that the correct 
application documents or parts are completely contained in the earlier 
application, remain the date on which the requirements laid down in Rule 
40, paragraph 1, were fulfilled, where the applicant so requests and files, 
within the period under paragraph 3:  
(a) 
a copy of the earlier application, unless such copy is available to the 
European Patent Office under Rule 53, paragraph 2;  
(b) 
where the earlier application is not in an official language of the 
European Patent Office, a translation thereof in one of these languages, 
unless such copy is available to the European Patent Office under Rule 53, 
paragraph 3;  
and  
(c) 
an indication as to where the correct application documents or parts 
are completely contained in the earlier application and, where applicable, in 
the translation thereof. If these requirements are fulfilled, the correct 
application documents or parts shall be included in the application and the 
erroneously filed application documents or parts shall remain in the 
application. 
(5) 
If the applicant:  
(a) 
fails to file the correct application documents or parts within the period 
under paragraph 1 or 3,  
or  
(b) 
withdraws under paragraph 7 any correct application documents or 
parts filed under paragraph 3,  
any filing of the correct application documents or parts shall be deemed not 
to have been made and the erroneously filed application documents or 
parts shall remain in the application or be restored to the application. The 
European Patent Office shall inform the applicant accordingly. 
(6) 
If the applicant fails to comply with the requirements referred to in 
paragraph 4(a) to (c) within the period under paragraph 3, the application 
shall be re-dated to the date on which the correct application documents or 
parts were filed. The filing of the erroneously filed application documents or 


 
 
43 
parts shall be deemed not to have been made. The European Patent Office 
shall inform the applicant accordingly. 
(7) 
Within one month of the notification referred to in paragraph 3 or 6, 
last sentence, the applicant may withdraw the correct application 
documents or parts filed, in which case the re-dating shall be deemed not 
to have been made. The European Patent Office shall inform the applicant 
accordingly. 
(8) 
If the applicant files correct application documents or parts under 
paragraph 3 or 4 after the European Patent Office has begun to draw up 
the search report, the European Patent Office shall invite the applicant to 
pay a further search fee within one month. If the search fee is not paid in 
due time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
Rule 57  
Examination as to formal requirements 
If the European patent application has been accorded a date of filing, the 
European Patent Office shall examine, in accordance with Article 90, 
paragraph 3, whether: 
(a)81 a translation of the application required under Article 14, paragraph 2, 
under Rule 36, paragraph 2, second sentence, or under Rule 40, 
paragraph 3, second sentence, has been filed in due time; 
(b) 
the request for grant of a European patent satisfies the requirements 
of Rule 41; 
(c) 
the application contains one or more claims in accordance with 
Article 78, paragraph 1(c), or a reference to a previously filed application in 
accordance with Rule 40, paragraphs 1(c), 2 and 3, indicating that it 
replaces also the claims;  
(d) 
the application contains an abstract in accordance with Article 78, 
paragraph 1(e);  
(e) 
the filing fee and the search fee have been paid in accordance with 
Rule 17, paragraph 2, Rule 36, paragraph 3, or Rule 38; 
(f) 
the designation of the inventor has been made in accordance with 
Rule 19, paragraph 1; 
(g) 
where appropriate, the requirements laid down in Rules 52 and 53 
concerning the claim to priority have been satisfied; 
(h) 
where appropriate, the requirements of Article 133, paragraph 2, have 
been satisfied; 
(i)82 the application meets the requirements laid down in Rule 49, 
paragraph 1 and the applicable requirements prescribed by the President of 
the European Patent Office under Rule 49, paragraph 2; 
 
44 
(j)83 the application meets the requirements laid down in Rule 30. 
Rule 58  
Correction of deficiencies in the application documents 
If the European patent application does not comply with the requirements of 
Rule 57(a) to (d), (h) and (i), the European Patent Office shall inform the 
applicant accordingly and invite him to correct the deficiencies noted within 
two months. The description, claims and drawings may be amended only to 
an extent sufficient to remedy such deficiencies. 
Rule 59  
Deficiencies in claiming priority 
If the file number of the previous application under Rule 52, paragraph 1, or 
the copy of that application under Rule 53, paragraph 1, have not been filed 
in due time, the European Patent Office shall inform the applicant 
accordingly and invite him to file them within a period to be specified. 
Rule 60  
Subsequent designation of the inventor 
(1) 
If the designation of the inventor has not been made in accordance 
with Rule 19, the European Patent Office shall inform the applicant that the 
European patent application will be refused unless the designation is made 
within sixteen months of the date of filing of the application or, if priority is 
claimed, of the date of priority, this period being deemed to have been 
observed if the information is communicated before completion of the 
technical preparations for the publication of the European patent 
application.  
(2) 
Where, in a divisional application or a new application under 
Article 61, paragraph 1(b), the designation of the inventor has not been 
made in accordance with Rule 19, the European Patent Office shall invite 
the applicant to make the designation within a period to be specified. 
Chapter II  
European search report 
Rule 61
Content of the European search report 
(1) 
The European search report shall mention those documents, 
available to the European Patent Office at the time of drawing up the report, 
which may be taken into consideration in deciding whether the invention to 
which the European patent application relates is new and involves an 
inventive step. 

 
45 
(2) 
Each citation shall be referred to the claims to which it relates. Where 
appropriate, relevant parts of the documents cited shall be identified. 
(3) 
The European search report shall distinguish between cited 
documents published before the date of priority claimed, between such 
date of priority and the date of filing, and on or after the date of filing. 
(4) 
Any document which refers to an oral disclosure, a use or any other 
means of disclosure which took place before the date of filing of the 
European patent application shall be mentioned in the European search 
report, together with an indication of the date of publication, if any, of the 
document and the date of the non-written disclosure. 
(5) 
The European search report shall be drawn up in the language of the 
proceedings. 
(6) 
The European search report shall contain the classification of the 
subject-matter of the European patent application in accordance with the 
international classification. 
Rule 62
Extended European search report  
(1) 
The European search report shall be accompanied by an opinion on 
whether the application and the invention to which it relates seem to meet 
the requirements of this Convention, unless a communication under 
Rule 71, paragraph 1 or 3, can be issued. 
(2) 
The opinion under paragraph 1 shall not be published together with 
the search report. 
Rule 62  
Applications containing a plurality of independent claims 
(1) 
If the European Patent Office considers that the claims as filed do not 
comply with Rule 43, paragraph 2, it shall invite the applicant to indicate, 
within a period of two months, the claims complying with Rule 43, 
paragraph 2, on the basis of which the search is to be carried out. If the 
applicant fails to provide such an indication in due time, the search shall be 
carried out on the basis of the first claim in each category. 
(2) 
The Examining Division shall invite the applicant to restrict the claims 
to the subject-matter searched unless it finds that the objection under 
paragraph 1 was not justified. 
 
85 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council of 09.12.2004 (OJ EPO 2005, 5), 
which entered into force on 01.07.2005. 
86 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 3/09 of 25.03.2009 (OJ EPO 
2009, 299), which entered into force on 01.04.2010. 
Art. 92  
R. 65, 70a, 137 
Art. 84, 92,  
R. 65, 135, 137 


 
 
46 
Rule 63  
Incomplete search 
(1) 
If the European Patent Office considers that the European patent 
application fails to such an extent to comply with this Convention that it is 
impossible to carry out a meaningful search regarding the state of the art 
on the basis of all or some of the subject-matter claimed, it shall invite the 
applicant to file, within a period of two months, a statement indicating the 
subject-matter to be searched. 
(2) 
If the statement under paragraph 1 is not filed in due time, or if it is 
not sufficient to overcome the deficiency noted under paragraph 1, the 
European Patent Office shall either issue a reasoned declaration stating 
that the European patent application fails to such an extent to comply with 
this Convention that it is impossible to carry out a meaningful search 
regarding the state of the art on the basis of all or some of the subject-
matter claimed or, as far as is practicable, draw up a partial search report. 
The reasoned declaration or the partial search report shall be considered, 
for the purposes of subsequent proceedings, as the European search 
report. 
(3) 
When a partial search report has been drawn up, the Examining 
Division shall invite the applicant to restrict the claims to the subject-matter 
searched unless it finds that the objection under paragraph 1 was not 
justified. 
Rule 64  
European search report where the invention lacks unity 
(1)89 If the European Patent Office considers that the European patent 
application does not comply with the requirement of unity of invention, it 
shall draw up a partial search report on those parts of the application which 
relate to the invention, or the group of inventions within the meaning of 
Article 82, first mentioned in the claims. It shall inform the applicant that, for 
the European search report to cover the other inventions, a further search 
fee must be paid, in respect of each invention involved, within a period of 
two months. The European search report shall be drawn up for the parts of 
the application relating to inventions in respect of which search fees have 
been paid. 
(2)90 Any fee paid under paragraph 1 shall be refunded if, during the 
examination of the European patent application, the applicant requests a 
refund and the Examining Division finds that the communication under 
paragraph 1 was not justified. 

47 
Rule 65  
Transmittal of the European search report 
Immediately after it has been drawn up, the European search report shall 
be transmitted to the applicant. The European Patent Office shall make 
available copies of any cited documents. 
Rule 66  
Definitive content of the abstract 
Upon drawing up the European search report, the European Patent Office 
shall determine the definitive content of the abstract and transmit it to the 
applicant together with the search report. 
Chapter III  
Publication of the European patent application 
Rule 67  
Technical preparations for publication 
(1) 
The President of the European Patent Office shall determine when 
the technical preparations for publication of the European patent application 
are deemed to have been completed. 
(2) 
The application shall not be published if it has been finally refused or 
withdrawn or is deemed to be withdrawn before the termination of the 
technical preparations for publication. 
Rule 68
Form of the publication of European patent applications and 
European search reports 
(1) 
The publication of the European patent application shall contain the 
description, the claims and any drawings as filed, and the abstract, or, if 
these documents making up the application were not filed in an official 
language of the European Patent Office, a translation in the language of the 
proceedings, and, in an annex, the European search report, where it is 
available before the termination of the technical preparations for 
publication. If the search report or the abstract is not published at the same 
time as the application, it shall be published separately.  
(2) 
The President of the European Patent Office shall determine the form 
of the publication of the application and the data to be included. The same 
shall apply where the European search report and the abstract are 
published separately.  
 

48 
(3) 
The designated Contracting States shall be indicated in the published 
application. 
(4)94 If the claims were not filed on the date of filing of the application, this 
shall be indicated when the application is published. If, before the 
termination of the technical preparations for publication of the application, 
the claims have been amended under Rule 137, paragraph 2, the new or 
amended claims shall be included in the publication in addition to the 
claims as filed. 
Rule 69
Information about publication 
(1) 
The European Patent Office shall inform the applicant of the date on 
which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the 
European search report and shall draw his attention to Rule 70, 
paragraph 1, Article 94, paragraph 2, and Rule 70a, paragraph 1. 
(2) 
If a date of publication is specified in the communication under 
paragraph 1 which is later than the actual date of publication, that later date 
shall be the decisive date as regards the periods referred to in Rule 70, 
paragraph 1, and Rule 70a, paragraph 1, unless the error is obvious.  
Rule 70  
Request for examination 
(1)96 The applicant may request examination of the European patent 
application up to six months after the date on which the European Patent 
Bulletin mentions the publication of the European search report. The 
request may not be withdrawn. 
(2) 
If the request for examination has been filed before the European 
search report has been transmitted to the applicant, the European Patent 
Office shall invite the applicant to indicate, within a period to be specified, 
whether he wishes to proceed further with the application, and shall give 
him the opportunity to comment on the search report and to amend, where 
appropriate, the description, claims and drawings. 
(3) 
If the applicant fails to reply in due time to the invitation under 
paragraph 2, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
 


 
 
49 
Chapter IV  
Examination by the Examining Division 
Rule 70a
Response to the extended European search report 
(1) 
In the opinion accompanying the European search report the 
European Patent Office shall give the applicant the opportunity to comment 
on the extended European search report and, where appropriate, invite him 
to correct any deficiencies noted in the opinion accompanying the 
European search report and to amend the description, claims and drawings 
within the period referred to in Rule 70, paragraph 1. 
(2) 
In the case referred to in Rule 70, paragraph 2, or if a supplementary 
European search report is drawn up on a Euro-PCT application, the 
European Patent Office shall give the applicant the opportunity to comment 
on the extended European search report and, where appropriate, invite him 
to correct any deficiencies noted in the opinion accompanying the Euro-
pean search report and to amend the description, claims and drawings 
within the period specified for indicating whether he wishes to proceed 
further with the application. 
(3) 
If the applicant neither complies with nor comments on an invitation in 
accordance with paragraph 1 or 2, the application shall be deemed to be 
withdrawn. 
Rule 70b
Request for a copy of search results 
(1) 
Where the European Patent Office notes, at the time the Examining 
Division assumes responsibility, that a copy referred to in Rule 141, 
paragraph 1, has not been filed by the applicant and is not deemed to be 
duly filed under Rule 141, paragraph 2, it shall invite the applicant to file, 
within a period of two months, the copy or a statement that the results of 
the search referred to in Rule 141, paragraph 1, are not available to him. 
(2) 
If the applicant fails to reply in due time to the invitation under 
paragraph 1, the European patent application shall be deemed to be 
withdrawn. 
 
97 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 3/09 of 25.03.2009 (OJ EPO 
2009, 299), which entered into force on 01.04.2010. 
98 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 18/09 of 28.10.2009 (OJ EPO 
2009, 585), which entered into force on 01.01.2011. 
 
See notices from the EPO of 28.07.2010 concerning amended Rule 141 EPC and new 
Rule 70b EPC – utilisation scheme (OJ EPO 2010, 410) and of 10.12.2014 concerning 
exemption under Rule 141(2) EPC from filing a copy of the search results – utilisation 
scheme (OJ EPO 2015, A3). 
Art. 94, 121, 123  
R. 62, 132, 135, 
137, 161 
Art. 124  
R. 10 


 
 
50 
Rule 71
Examination procedure 
(1) 
In any communication under Article 94, paragraph 3, the Examining 
Division shall, where appropriate, invite the applicant to correct any 
deficiencies noted and to amend the description, claims and drawings 
within a period to be specified. 
(2) 
Any communication under Article 94, paragraph 3, shall contain a 
reasoned statement covering, where appropriate, all the grounds against 
the grant of the European patent. 
(3)102 Before the Examining Division decides to grant the European patent, 
it shall inform the applicant of the text in which it intends to grant it and of 
the related bibliographic data. In this communication the Examining Division 
shall invite the applicant to pay the fee for grant and publishing and to file a 
translation of the claims in the two official languages of the European 
Patent Office other than the language of the proceedings within four 
months.  
(4) 
If the European patent application in the text intended for grant 
comprises more than fifteen claims, the Examining Division shall invite the 
applicant to pay claims fees in respect of the sixteenth and each 
subsequent claim within the period under paragraph 3 unless the said fees 
have already been paid under Rule 45 or Rule 162.  
(5) 
If the applicant, within the period laid down in paragraph 3, pays the 
fees under paragraph 3 and, where applicable, paragraph 4 and files the 
translations under paragraph 3, he shall be deemed to have approved the 
text communicated to him under paragraph 3 and verified the bibliographic 
data. 
(6) 
If the applicant, within the period under paragraph 3, requests 
reasoned amendments or corrections to the communicated text or keeps to 
the latest text submitted by him, the Examining Division shall issue a new 
communication under paragraph 3 if it gives its consent; otherwise it shall 
resume the examination proceedings.  
(7) 
If the fee for grant and publishing or the claims fees are not paid in 
due time, or if the translations are not filed in due time, the European patent 
application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
 
51 
Rule 71a
Conclusion of the grant procedure 
(1) 
The decision to grant the European patent shall be issued if all fees 
have been paid, a translation of the claims in the two official languages of 
the European Patent Office other than the language of the proceedings has 
been filed and there is agreement as to the text to be granted. It shall state 
which text of the European patent application forms the basis for the 
decision. 
(2) 
Until the decision to grant the European patent, the Examining 
Division may resume the examination proceedings at any time.  
(3) 
If the designation fee becomes due after the communication under 
Rule 71, paragraph 3, the mention of the grant of the European patent shall 
not be published until the designation fee has been paid. The applicant 
shall be informed accordingly.  
(4) 
If a renewal fee becomes due after the communication under Rule 71, 
paragraph 3, and before the next possible date for publication of the 
mention of the grant of the European patent, the mention shall not be 
published until the renewal fee has been paid. The applicant shall be 
informed accordingly. 
(5) 
If, in response to an invitation under Rule 71, paragraph 3, the 
applicant has already paid the fee for grant and publishing or the claims 
fees, the paid amount shall be credited if a further such invitation is issued. 
(6) 
If the European patent application is refused, withdrawn prior to 
notification of the decision on the grant of a European patent or, at that 
time, deemed to be withdrawn, the fee for grant and publishing shall be 
refunded. 
Rule 72  
Grant of the European patent to different applicants 
Where different persons are recorded in the European Patent Register as 
applicants in respect of different Contracting States, the European Patent 
Office shall grant the European patent for each Contracting State 
accordingly. 
 
103 Inserted by decision of the Administrative Council CA/D 2/10 of 26.10.2010 (OJ EPO 
2010, 637), which entered into force on 01.04.2012. 
 


 
 
52 
Chapter V  
The European patent specification 
Rule 73
Content and form of the specification 
(1) 
The specification of the European patent shall include the description, 
the claims and any drawings. It shall also indicate the period for opposing 
the European patent.  
(2) 
The President of the European Patent Office shall determine the form 
of the publication of the specification and the data to be included. 
(3) 
The designated Contracting States shall be indicated in the 
specification. 
Rule 74 
Certificate for a European patent 
As soon as the specification of the European patent has been published, 
the European Patent Office shall issue to the proprietor of the patent a 
certificate for a European patent. The President of the European Patent 
Office shall prescribe the content, form and means of communication of the 
certificate and determine the circumstances in which an administrative fee 
is payable. 
 
 
 
53 
PART V  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART V OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
Opposition procedure 
Rule 75  
Surrender or lapse of the patent 
An opposition may be filed even if the European patent has been 
surrendered in all the designated Contracting States or has lapsed in all 
those States. 
Rule 76 
Form and content of the opposition 
(1) 
Notice of opposition shall be filed in a written reasoned statement.  
(2) 
The notice of opposition shall contain: 
(a) 
particulars of the opponent as provided in Rule 41, paragraph 2(c); 
(b) 
the number of the European patent against which opposition is filed, 
the name of the proprietor of the patent and the title of the invention; 
(c) 
a statement of the extent to which the European patent is opposed 
and of the grounds on which the opposition is based, as well as an 
indication of the facts and evidence presented in support of these grounds; 
(d) 
if the opponent has appointed a representative, particulars as 
provided in Rule 41, paragraph 2(d). 
(3) 
Part III of the  shall apply mutatis mutandis 
to the notice of opposition.  
Rule 77  
Rejection of the opposition as inadmissible 
(1)108 If the Opposition Division notes that the notice of opposition does not 
comply with Article 99, paragraph 1, or Rule 76, paragraph 2(c), or does not 
sufficiently identify the patent against which opposition has been filed, it 
shall reject the opposition as inadmissible, unless these deficiencies have 
been remedied before expiry of the opposition period. 
(2) 
If the Opposition Division notes that the notice of opposition does not 
comply with provisions other than those referred to in paragraph 1, it shall 
communicate this to the opponent and shall invite him to remedy the 
deficiencies noted within a period to be specified. If the deficiencies are not 
 


 
 
54 
remedied in due time, the Opposition Division shall reject the opposition as 
inadmissible. 
(3) 
The decision to reject an opposition as inadmissible shall be 
communicated to the proprietor of the patent, together with a copy of the 
notice of opposition. 
Rule 78  
Procedure where the proprietor of the patent is not entitled 
(1) 
If a third party provides evidence, during opposition proceedings or 
during the opposition period, that he has instituted proceedings against the 
proprietor of the European patent, seeking a decision within the meaning of 
Article 61, paragraph 1, opposition proceedings shall be stayed unless the 
third party communicates to the European Patent Office in writing his 
consent to the continuation of such proceedings. Such consent shall be 
irrevocable. However, proceedings shall not be stayed until the Opposition 
Division has deemed the opposition admissible. Rule 14, paragraphs 2 to 4, 
shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
(2) 
Where a third party has, in accordance with Article 99, paragraph 4, 
replaced the previous proprietor for one or some of the designated 
Contracting States, the patent as maintained in opposition proceedings 
may, for these States, contain claims, a description and drawings different 
from those for the other designated States. 
Rule 79  
Preparation of the examination of the opposition 
(1) 
The Opposition Division shall communicate the notice of opposition to 
the proprietor of the patent and shall give him the opportunity to file his 
observations and to amend, where appropriate, the description, claims and 
drawings within a period to be specified. 
(2) 
If several notices of opposition have been filed, the Opposition 
Division shall communicate them to the other opponents at the same time 
as the communication under paragraph 1. 
(3) 
The Opposition Division shall communicate any observations and 
amendments filed by the proprietor of the patent to the other parties, and 
shall invite them, if it considers this expedient, to reply within a period to be 
specified. 
(4) 
In the case of an intervention under Article 105, the Opposition 
Division may dispense with the application of paragraphs 1 to 3. 
 

 
 
55 
Rule 80 
Amendment of the European patent 
Without prejudice to Rule 138, the description, claims and drawings may be 
amended, provided that the amendments are occasioned by a ground for 
opposition under Article 100, even if that ground has not been invoked by 
the opponent. 
Rule 81 
Examination of opposition 
(1)113 The Opposition Division shall examine those grounds for opposition 
which are invoked in the opponent's statement under Rule 76, 
paragraph 2(c). Grounds for opposition not invoked by the opponent may 
be examined by the Opposition Division of its own motion if they would 
prejudice the maintenance of the European patent.  
(2) 
Communications under Article 101, paragraph 1, second sentence, 
and all replies thereto shall be sent to all parties. If the Opposition Division 
considers this expedient, it shall invite the parties to reply within a period to 
be specified.  
(3) 
In any communication under Article 101, paragraph 1, second 
sentence, the proprietor of the European patent shall, where necessary, be 
given the opportunity to amend, where appropriate, the description, claims 
and drawings. Where necessary, the communication shall contain a 
reasoned statement covering the grounds against the maintenance of the 
European patent. 
Rule 82
Maintenance of the European patent in amended form 
(1) 
Before the Opposition Division decides to maintain the European 
patent as amended, it shall inform the parties of the text in which it intends 
to maintain the patent, and shall invite them to file their observations within 
two months if they disapprove of that text. 
(2)115 If a party disapproves of the text communicated by the Opposition 
Division, examination of the opposition may be continued. Otherwise, the 
Opposition Division shall, on expiry of the period under paragraph 1, invite 
the proprietor of the patent to pay the prescribed fee and to file a translation 
of any amended claims in the official languages of the European Patent 
Office other than the language of the proceedings, within a period of three 
months. Where, in oral proceedings, decisions under Article 106, para-
graph 2, or Article 111, paragraph 2, have been based on documents not 
complying with the applicable requirements prescribed by the President of 
 



 
 
56 
the European Patent Office under Rule 49, paragraph 2, the proprietor of 
the patent shall be invited to file the amended text in a form compliant with 
Rule 49, paragraph 8, those requirements within the three-month period.  
(3) 
If the acts required under paragraph 2 are not performed in due time, 
they may still be performed within two months of a communication 
concerning the failure to observe the time limit, provided that a surcharge is 
paid within this period. Otherwise, the patent shall be revoked.  
(4) 
The decision to maintain the European patent as amended shall state 
which text of the patent forms the basis for the decision. 
Rule 83  
Request for documents 
Documents referred to by a party to opposition proceedings shall be filed 
together with the notice of opposition or the written submissions. If such 
documents are neither enclosed nor filed in due time upon invitation by the 
European Patent Office, it may decide not to take into account any 
arguments based on them. 
Rule 84  
Continuation of the opposition proceedings by the European Patent 
Office of its own motion 
(1) 
If the European patent has been surrendered in all the designated 
Contracting States or has lapsed in all those States, the opposition 
proceedings may be continued at the request of the opponent filed within 
two months of a communication from the European Patent Office informing 
him of the surrender or lapse. 
(2) 
In the event of the death or legal incapacity of an opponent, the 
opposition proceedings may be continued by the European Patent Office of 
its own motion, even without the participation of the heirs or legal 
representatives. The same shall apply where the opposition is withdrawn.  
Rule 85  
Transfer of the European patent 
Rule 22 shall apply to any transfer of the European patent made during the 
opposition period or during opposition proceedings. 
Rule 86
Documents in opposition proceedings 
Part III of the  shall apply mutatis mutandis to 
documents filed in opposition proceedings. 
 

57 
Rule 87  
Content and form of the new specification of the European patent 
The new specification of the European patent shall include the description, 
claims and drawings as amended. Rule 73, paragraphs 2 and 3, and 
Rule 74 shall apply. 
Rule 88  
Costs 
(1) 
The apportionment of costs shall be dealt with in the decision on the 
opposition. Such apportionment shall only take into consideration the 
expenses necessary to assure proper protection of the rights involved. The 
costs shall include the remuneration of the representatives of the parties.  
(2) 
The Opposition Division shall, on request, fix the amount of costs to 
be paid under a final decision apportioning them. A bill of costs, with 
supporting evidence, shall be attached to the request. Costs may be fixed 
once their credibility is established. 
(3) 
A request for a decision by the Opposition Division may be filed within 
one month of the communication on the fixing of costs under paragraph 2. 
The request shall be filed in writing and state the grounds on which it is 
based. It shall not be deemed to be filed until the prescribed fee has been 
paid. 
(4) 
The Opposition Division shall decide on the request under 
paragraph 3 without oral proceedings. 
Rule 89 
Intervention of the assumed infringer 
(1) 
Notice of intervention shall be filed within three months of the date on 
which proceedings referred to in Article 105 are instituted. 
(2) 
Notice of intervention shall be filed in a written reasoned statement; 
Rules 76 and 77 shall apply mutatis mutandis. The notice of intervention 
shall not be deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been 
paid. 
Chapter II  
Procedure for limitation or revocation 
Rule 90  
Subject of proceedings 
The subject of limitation or revocation proceedings under Article 105a shall 
be the European patent as granted or as amended in opposition or 
limitation proceedings before the European Patent Office.  
 
118 See decisions of the Enlarged Board of Appeal G 4/91, G 1/94, G 2/04, G 3/04, G 1/05 
(Annex I). 
Art. 103 
Art. 104, 106  
R. 97 
Art. 99  
R. 3, 6, 76-86, 112 
Art. 2, 105a 


 
 
58 
Rule 91  
Responsibility for proceedings 
Decisions on requests for limitation or revocation of the European patent 
under Article 105a shall be taken by the Examining Division. Article 18, 
paragraph 2, shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
Rule 92  
Requirements of the request 
(1)119 The request for limitation or revocation of a European patent shall be 
filed in writing in one of the official languages of the European Patent 
Office. It may also be filed in an official language of a Contracting State, 
provided that a translation is filed in one of the official languages of the 
European Patent Office within the period specified in Rule 6, paragraph 2. 
Part III of the  shall apply mutatis mutandis to 
documents filed in limitation or revocation proceedings. 
(2) 
The request shall contain: 
(a) 
particulars of the proprietor of the European patent making the 
request (the requester) as provided in Rule 41, paragraph 2(c), and an 
indication of the Contracting States for which the requester is the proprietor 
of the patent; 
(b) 
the number of the patent whose limitation or revocation is requested, 
and a list of the Contracting States in which the patent has taken effect; 
(c) 
where appropriate, the names and addresses of the proprietors of the 
patent for those Contracting States in which the requester is not the 
proprietor of the patent, and evidence that the requester is entitled to act on 
their behalf in the proceedings; 
(d) 
where limitation of the patent is requested, the complete version of 
the amended claims and, as the case may be, of the amended description 
and drawings; 
(e) 
where the requester has appointed a representative, particulars as 
provided in Rule 41, paragraph 2(d). 
Rule 93  
Precedence of opposition proceedings 
(1) 
The request for limitation or revocation shall be deemed not to have 
been filed if opposition proceedings in respect of the patent are pending at 
the time of filing the request. 
(2) 
If, at the time of filing an opposition to a European patent, limitation 
proceedings in respect of that patent are pending, the Examining Division 
shall terminate the limitation proceedings and order the reimbursement of 
the limitation fee. The reimbursement shall also be ordered in respect of the 
 
 
59 
fee referred to in Rule 95, paragraph 3, first sentence, if the requester has 
already paid this fee. 
Rule 94  
Rejection of the request as inadmissible 
If the Examining Division finds that the request for limitation or revocation 
fails to comply with the requirements of Rule 92, it shall invite the requester 
to correct the deficiencies noted, within a period to be specified. If the 
deficiencies are not corrected in due time, the Examining Division shall 
reject the request as inadmissible. 
Rule 95  
Decision on the request 
(1) 
If a request for revocation is admissible, the Examining Division shall 
revoke the patent and communicate this to the requester. 
(2) 
If a request for limitation is admissible, the Examining Division shall 
examine whether the amended claims constitute a limitation vis-à-vis the 
claims as granted or amended in opposition or limitation proceedings and 
comply with Article 84 and Article 123, paragraphs 2 and 3. If the request 
does not comply with these requirements, the Examining Division shall give 
the requester one opportunity to correct any deficiencies noted, and to 
amend the claims and, where appropriate, the description and drawings, 
within a period to be specified. 
(3)120 If a request for limitation is allowable under paragraph 2, the 
Examining Division shall communicate this to the requester and invite him 
to pay the prescribed fee and to file a translation of the amended claims in 
the official languages of the European Patent Office other than the 
language of the proceedings, within a period of three months; Rule 82, 
paragraph 3, first sentence, shall apply mutatis mutandis. If the requester 
performs these acts in due time, the Examining Division shall limit the 
patent. 
(4) 
If the requester does not respond in due time to the communication 
issued under paragraph 2, or if the request for limitation is not allowable, or 
if the requester fails to perform the acts required under paragraph 3 in due 
time, the Examining Division shall reject the request. 
Rule 96  
Content and form of the amended European patent specification 
The amended European patent specification shall include the description, 
claims and drawings as amended. Rule 73, paragraphs 2 and 3, and 
Rule 74 shall apply.  
 
 
 
60 
PART VI  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART VI OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
Appeals procedure 
Rule 97 
Appeal against apportionment and fixing of costs 
(1) 
The apportionment of costs of opposition proceedings cannot be the 
sole subject of an appeal. 
(2) 
A decision fixing the amount of costs of opposition proceedings 
cannot be appealed unless the amount exceeds that of the fee for appeal.  
Rule 98  
Surrender or lapse of the patent 
The decision of an Opposition Division may be appealed even if the 
European patent has been surrendered in all the designated Contracting 
States or has lapsed in all those States. 
Rule 99 
Content of the notice of appeal and the statement of grounds 
(1) 
The notice of appeal shall contain: 
(a) 
the name and the address of the appellant as provided in Rule 41, 
paragraph 2(c); 
(b) 
an indication of the decision impugned; and 
(c) 
a request defining the subject of the appeal. 
(2) 
In the statement of grounds of appeal the appellant shall indicate the 
reasons for setting aside the decision impugned, or the extent to which it is 
to be amended, and the facts and evidence on which the appeal is based.  
(3) 
Part III of the  shall apply mutatis mutandis 
to the notice of appeal, the statement of grounds and the documents filed in 
appeal proceedings. 
Rule 100  
Examination of appeals 
(1)124 Unless otherwise provided, the provisions relating to proceedings 
before the department which has taken the decision impugned shall apply 
to appeal proceedings. 

 
61 
(2) 
In the examination of the appeal, the Board of Appeal shall invite the 
parties, as often as necessary, to file observations, within a period to be 
specified, on communications issued by itself or observations submitted by 
another party. 
(3) 
If the applicant fails to reply in due time to an invitation under 
paragraph 2, the European patent application shall be deemed to be 
withdrawn, unless the decision impugned was taken by the Legal Division.  
Rule 101  
Rejection of the appeal as inadmissible 
(1) 
If the appeal does not comply with Articles 106 to 108, Rule 97 or 
Rule 99, paragraph 1(b) or (c) or paragraph 2, the Board of Appeal shall 
reject it as inadmissible, unless any deficiency has been remedied before 
the relevant period under Article 108 has expired. 
(2) 
If the Board of Appeal notes that the appeal does not comply with 
Rule 99, paragraph 1(a), it shall communicate this to the appellant and shall 
invite him to remedy the deficiencies noted within a period to be specified. If 
the deficiencies are not remedied in due time, the Board of Appeal shall 
reject the appeal as inadmissible. 
Rule 102  
Form of decision of the Board of Appeal 
The decision shall be authenticated by the Chairman of the Board of 
Appeal and by the competent employee of the registry of the Board of 
Appeal, either by their signature or by any other appropriate means.127 The 
decision shall contain: 
(a) 
a statement that it was delivered by the Board of Appeal; 
(b) 
the date when the decision was taken; 
(c) 
the names of the Chairman and of the other members of the Board of 
Appeal taking part; 
(d) 
the names of the parties and their representatives; 
(e) 
the requests of the parties; 
(f) 
a summary of the facts; 
(g) 
the reasons; 
(h) 
the order of the Board of Appeal, including, where appropriate, a 
decision on costs. 
 

 
 
62 
Rule 103 
Reimbursement of appeal fees 
(1) 
The appeal fee shall be reimbursed in full 
(a) 
in the event of interlocutory revision or where the Board of Appeal 
deems an appeal to be allowable, if such reimbursement is equitable by 
reason of a substantial procedural violation, or  
(b) 
if the appeal is withdrawn before the filing of the statement of grounds 
of appeal and before the period for filing that statement has expired. 
(2) 
The appeal fee shall be reimbursed at 75% if, in response to a 
communication from the Board of Appeal indicating its intention to start 
substantive examination of the appeal, the appeal is withdrawn within two 
months of notification of that communication. 
(3) 
The appeal fee shall be reimbursed at 50% if the appeal is withdrawn 
after expiry of the period under paragraph 1(b), provided withdrawal occurs: 
(a) 
if a date for oral proceedings has been set, within one month of 
notification of a communication issued by the Board of Appeal in 
preparation for these oral proceedings; 
(b) 
if no date for oral proceedings has been set, and the Board of Appeal 
has issued a communication inviting the appellant to file observations, 
before expiry of the period set by the Board for filing observations; 
(c) 
in all other cases, before the decision is issued. 
(4) 
The appeal fee shall be reimbursed at 25% 
(a) 
if the appeal is withdrawn after expiry of the period under paragraph 
3(a) but before the decision is announced at oral proceedings; 
(b) 
if the appeal is withdrawn after expiry of the period under paragraph 
3(b) but before the decision is issued; 
(c) 
if any request for oral proceedings is withdrawn within one month of 
notification of the communication issued by the Board of Appeal in 
preparation for the oral proceedings, and no oral proceedings take place. 
(5) 
The appeal fee shall be reimbursed under only one of the above 
provisions. Where more than one rate of reimbursement applies, 
reimbursement shall be at the higher rate. 
(6) 
The department whose decision is impugned shall order the 
reimbursement if it revises its decision and considers reimbursement 
equitable by reason of a substantial procedural violation. In all other cases, 
matters of reimbursement shall be decided by the Board of Appeal. 
 

63 
Chapter II  
Petitions for review by the Enlarged Board of Appeal 
Rule 104  
Further fundamental procedural defects 
A fundamental procedural defect under Article 112a, paragraph 2(d), may 
have occurred where the Board of Appeal, 
(a) 
contrary to Article 116, failed to arrange for the holding of oral 
proceedings requested by the petitioner, or 
(b) 
decided on the appeal without deciding on a request relevant to that 
decision. 
Rule 105  
Criminal acts 
A petition for review may be based on Article 112a, paragraph 2(e), if a 
competent court or authority has finally established that the criminal act 
occurred; a conviction is not necessary.  
Rule 106  
Obligation to raise objections 
A petition under Article 112a, paragraph 2(a) to (d), is only admissible 
where an objection in respect of the procedural defect was raised during 
the appeal proceedings and dismissed by the Board of Appeal, except 
where such objection could not be raised during the appeal proceedings. 
Rule 107  
Contents of the petition for review 
(1) 
The petition shall contain:  
(a) 
the name and the address of the petitioner as provided in Rule 41, 
paragraph 2(c); 
(b) 
an indication of the decision to be reviewed. 
(2) 
The petition shall indicate the reasons for setting aside the decision of 
the Board of Appeal, and the facts and evidence on which the petition is 
based.  
(3) 
Part III of the  shall apply mutatis mutandis 
to the petition for review and the documents filed in the proceedings. 
Rule 108  
Examination of the petition 
(1) 
If the petition does not comply with Article 112a, paragraphs 1, 2 or 4, 
Rule 106 or Rule 107, paragraph 1(b) or 2, the Enlarged Board of Appeal 
shall reject it as inadmissible, unless any defect has been remedied before 
the relevant period under Article 112a, paragraph 4, expires. 
Art. 112a 
Art. 112a 
R. 108 
Art. 112a  
R. 2 


 
 
64 
(2) 
If the Enlarged Board of Appeal notes that the petition does not 
comply with Rule 107, paragraph 1(a), it shall communicate this to the 
petitioner and shall invite him to remedy the deficiencies noted within a 
period to be specified. If the deficiencies are not remedied in due time, the 
Enlarged Board of Appeal shall reject the petition as inadmissible. 
(3)130 If the petition is allowable, the Enlarged Board of Appeal shall set 
aside the decision of the Board of Appeal and order the re-opening of the 
proceedings before the Board of Appeal responsible under Rule 12b, 
paragraph 4. The Enlarged Board of Appeal may order that members of the 
Board of Appeal who participated in taking the decision set aside shall be 
replaced. 
Rule 109  
Procedure in dealing with petitions for review 
(1) 
In proceedings under Article 112a, the provisions relating to 
proceedings before the Boards of Appeal shall apply, unless otherwise 
provided. Rule 115, paragraph 1, second sentence, Rule 118, paragraph 2, 
first sentence, and Rule 132, paragraph 2, shall not apply. The Enlarged 
Board of Appeal may specify a period deviating from Rule 4, paragraph 1, 
first sentence. 
(2) 
The Enlarged Board of Appeal  
(a) 
consisting of two legally qualified members and one technically 
qualified member shall examine all petitions for review and shall reject 
those which are clearly inadmissible or unallowable; such decision shall 
require unanimity; 
(b) 
consisting of four legally qualified members and one technically 
qualified member shall decide on any petition not rejected under sub-para-
graph (a). 
(3) 
The 
Enlarged 
Board 
of 
Appeal 
composed 
according 
to 
paragraph 2(a) shall decide without the involvement of other parties and on 
the basis of the petition.  
Rule 110  
Reimbursement of the fee for petitions for review 
The Enlarged Board of Appeal shall order the reimbursement of the fee for 
a petition for review if the proceedings before the Boards of Appeal are 
reopened. 


65 
PART VII  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART VII OF THE CONVENTION 
Chapter I  
Decisions and communications of the European Patent Office 
Rule 111  
Form of decisions 
(1) 
Where oral proceedings are held before the European Patent Office, 
the decision may be given orally. The decision shall subsequently be put in 
writing and notified to the parties. 
(2) 
Decisions of the European Patent Office which are open to appeal 
shall be reasoned and shall be accompanied by a communication pointing 
out the possibility of appeal and drawing the attention of the parties to 
Articles 106 to 108, the text of which shall be attached. The parties may not 
invoke the omission of the communication. 
Rule 112
Noting of loss of rights 
(1) 
If the European Patent Office notes that a loss of rights has occurred, 
without any decision concerning the refusal of the European patent 
application or the grant, revocation or maintenance of the European patent, 
or the taking of evidence, it shall communicate this to the party concerned. 
(2) 
If the party concerned considers that the finding of the European 
Patent Office is inaccurate, it may, within two months of the communication 
under paragraph 1, apply for a decision on the matter. The European 
Patent Office shall take such decision only if it does not share the opinion of 
the party requesting it; otherwise, it shall inform that party. 
Rule 113 
Signature, name, seal 
(1) 
Any decisions, summonses, notices and communications from the 
European Patent Office shall be signed by, and state the name of, the 
employee responsible. 
(2) 
Where a document referred to in paragraph 1 is produced by the 
employee responsible using a computer, a seal may replace the signature. 
Where the document is produced automatically by a computer, the 
employee's name may also be dispensed with. The same shall apply to 
pre-printed notices and communications. 
 

66 
Chapter II  
Observations by third parties 
Rule 114 
Observations by third parties 
(1) 
Any observations by a third party shall be filed in writing in an official 
language of the European Patent Office and state the grounds on which 
they are based. Rule 3, paragraph 3, shall apply. 
(2) 
Any such observations shall be communicated to the applicant for or 
proprietor of the patent, who may comment on them. 
Chapter III  
Oral proceedings and taking of evidence 
Rule 115  
Summons to oral proceedings 
(1) 
The parties shall be summoned to oral proceedings under Article 116, 
drawing their attention to paragraph 2 of this Rule. At least two months' 
notice of the summons shall be given, unless the parties agree to a shorter 
period. 
(2)136 If a party duly summoned to oral proceedings before the European 
Patent Office does not appear as summoned, the proceedings may 
continue without that party. 
Rule 116  
Preparation of oral proceedings 
(1) 
When issuing the summons, the European Patent Office shall draw 
attention to the points which in its opinion need to be discussed for the 
purposes of the decision to be taken. At the same time a final date for 
making written submissions in preparation for the oral proceedings shall be 
fixed. Rule 132 shall not apply. New facts and evidence presented after that 
date need not be considered, unless admitted on the grounds that the 
subject of the proceedings has changed. 
(2) 
If the applicant or patent proprietor has been notified of the grounds 
prejudicing the grant or maintenance of the patent, he may be invited to 
submit, by the date specified in paragraph 1, second sentence, documents 
which meet the requirements of the Convention. Paragraph 1, third and 
fourth sentences, shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
 

 
 
67 
Rule 117 
Decision on taking of evidence 
Where the European Patent Office considers it necessary to hear a party, 
witness or expert, or to carry out an inspection, it shall take a decision to 
this end, setting out the investigation which it intends to carry out, relevant 
facts to be proved and the date, time and place of the investigation and 
whether it will be conducted by videoconference. If the hearing of a witness 
or expert is requested by a party, the decision shall specify the period 
within which the requester must make known the name and address of any 
witness or expert concerned. 
Rule 118  
Summons to give evidence before the European Patent Office 
(1) 
A summons to give evidence before the European Patent Office shall 
be issued to the parties, witnesses or experts concerned. 
(2) 
At least two months' notice of a summons issued to a party, witness 
or expert to testify shall be given, unless they agree to a shorter period. The 
summons shall contain: 
(a) 
an extract from the decision under Rule 117, indicating the date, time 
and place of the investigation ordered, specifying whether it will be 
conducted by videoconference and stating the facts in respect of which 
parties, witnesses or experts are to be heard; 
(b) 
the names of the parties and particulars of the rights which the 
witnesses or experts may invoke under Rule 122, paragraphs 2 to 4; 
(c) 
an indication that a party, witness or expert who has been summoned 
to appear before the European Patent Office on its premises may, at his 
request, be heard by videoconference; 
(d) 
an indication that the party, witness or expert may request to be 
heard by a competent court of his country of residence under Rule 120, and 
an invitation to inform the European Patent Office, within a period to be 
specified, whether he is prepared to appear before it. 
Rule 119 
Examination of evidence before the European Patent Office 
(1) 
The Examining Division, Opposition Division or Board of Appeal may 
commission one of its members to examine the evidence adduced. 
(2) 
Before a party, witness or expert may be heard, he shall be informed 
that the European Patent Office may request the competent court in the 

68 
country of residence of the person concerned to re-examine his testimony 
under oath or in an equally binding form. 
(3) 
The parties may attend an investigation and may put relevant 
questions to the testifying party, witness or expert. 
Rule 120  
Hearing by a competent national court 
(1) 
A party, witness or expert who is summoned before the European 
Patent Office may request the latter to allow him to be heard by a 
competent court in his country of residence. If this is requested, or if no 
reply is received within the period specified in the summons, the European 
Patent Office may, in accordance with Article 131, paragraph 2, request the 
competent court to hear the person concerned. 
(2) 
If a party, witness or expert has been heard by the European Patent 
Office, the latter may, if it considers it advisable for the testimony to be 
given under oath or in an equally binding form, issue a request under 
Article 131, paragraph 2, to the competent court in the country of residence 
of the person concerned to re-examine his testimony under such 
conditions. 
(3) 
When the European Patent Office requests a competent court to take 
evidence, it may request the court to take the evidence under oath or in an 
equally binding form and to permit a member of the department concerned 
to attend the hearing and question the party, witness or expert, either 
through the intermediary of the court or directly. 
Rule 121  
Commissioning of experts 
(1) 
The European Patent Office shall decide in what form the opinion of 
an expert whom it appoints shall be submitted. 
(2) 
The terms of reference of the expert shall include: 
(a) 
a precise description of his task; 
(b) 
the period specified for the submission of his opinion; 
(c) 
the names of the parties to the proceedings; 
(d) 
particulars of the rights which he may invoke under Rule 122, 
paragraphs 2 to 4. 
(3) 
A copy of any written opinion shall be submitted to the parties. 
(4) 
The parties may object to an expert. The department of the European 
Patent Office concerned shall decide on the objection. 
Art. 117  
R. 4, 117-124 
Art. 117  
R. 120 


 
 
69 
Rule 122  
Costs of taking of evidence 
(1) 
The taking of evidence by the European Patent Office may be made 
conditional upon deposit with it, by the party requesting the evidence to be 
taken, of an amount to be fixed by reference to an estimate of the costs. 
(2) 
Witnesses or experts who are summoned by and appear before the 
European Patent Office shall be entitled to appropriate reimbursement of 
expenses for travel and subsistence. An advance for these expenses may 
be granted to them. This shall also apply to persons who appear before the 
European Patent Office without being summoned by it and are heard as 
witnesses or experts. 
(3) 
Witnesses entitled to reimbursement under paragraph 2 shall also be 
entitled to appropriate compensation for loss of earnings, and experts to 
fees for their work. These payments shall be made to the witnesses and 
experts after they have fulfilled their duties or tasks. 
(4)140 The Administrative Council shall lay down the details implementing 
paragraphs 2 and 3. Any amounts due under these provisions shall be paid 
by the European Patent Office. 
Rule 123  
Conservation of evidence 
(1) 
On request, the European Patent Office may, without delay, take 
measures to conserve evidence of facts liable to affect a decision which it 
may be called upon to take with regard to a European patent application or 
a European patent, where there is reason to fear that it might subsequently 
become more difficult or even impossible to take evidence. The date on 
which the measures are to be taken shall be communicated to the applicant 
for or proprietor of the patent in sufficient time to allow him to attend. He 
may ask relevant questions. 
(2) 
The request shall contain: 
(a) 
particulars of the requester as provided in Rule 41, paragraph 2(c); 
(b) 
sufficient identification of the European patent application or 
European patent in question; 
(c) 
an indication of the facts in respect of which evidence is to be taken; 
(d) 
particulars of the means of giving or obtaining evidence; 
(e) 
a statement establishing a prima facie case for fearing that it might 
subsequently become more difficult or impossible to take evidence. 
(3) 
The request shall not be deemed to have been filed until the 
prescribed fee has been paid. 
 
140 See regulation of the Administrative Council of 21.10.1977 on compensation and fees 
payable to witnesses and experts (OJ EPO 1983, 102). 
Art. 33, 117  
R. 117-121 
Art. 117, 120 


 
 
70 
(4) 
The decision on the request and any resulting taking of evidence shall 
be incumbent upon the department of the European Patent Office which 
would have to take the decision liable to be affected by the facts to be 
established. The provisions with regard to the taking of evidence in 
proceedings before the European Patent Office shall apply. 
Rule 124  
Minutes of oral proceedings and of taking of evidence 
(1) 
Minutes of oral proceedings and of the taking of evidence shall be 
drawn up, containing the essentials of the oral proceedings or of the taking 
of evidence, the relevant statements made by the parties, the testimony of 
the parties, witnesses or experts and the result of any inspection. 
(2) 
The minutes of the testimony of a witness, expert or party shall be 
read out, submitted to him, so that he may examine them or, where they 
are recorded by technical means, played back to him, unless he waives this 
right. It shall be noted in the minutes that this formality has been carried out 
and that the person who gave the testimony approved the minutes. If his 
approval is not given, his objections shall be noted. It is not necessary to 
play back the minutes or to obtain approval of them if the testimony has 
been recorded verbatim and directly using technical means. 
(3)141 The minutes shall be authenticated by the employee responsible for 
drawing them up and by the employee who conducted the oral proceedings 
or taking of evidence, either by their signature or by any other appropriate 
means. 
(4) 
The parties shall be provided with a copy of the minutes. 
Chapter IV  
Notifications 
Rule 125  
General provisions 
(1) 
The European Patent Office shall, as a matter of course, notify those 
concerned of decisions and summonses, and of any notice or other 
communication from which a time limit is reckoned, or of which those 
concerned must be notified under the Convention, or of which notification 
has been ordered by the President of the European Patent Office. Any 
notification to be made shall take the form of the original document, a copy 
thereof certified by or bearing the seal of the European Patent Office, a 
computer print-out bearing such seal or an electronic document containing 
such seal or otherwise certified. Copies of documents emanating from the 
parties themselves shall not require such certification. 
 


 
 
71 
(2) 
Notification shall be made: 
(a) 
by postal services in accordance with Rule 126; 
(b) 
by means of electronic communication in accordance with Rule 127; 
(c) 
by delivery on the premises of the European Patent Office in 
accordance with Rule 128; or 
(d) 
by public notice in accordance with Rule 129.  
(3) 
Notification through the central industrial property office of a 
Contracting State shall be made in accordance with the law applicable to 
that office in national proceedings. 
(4) 
Where a document has reached the addressee, if the European 
Patent Office is unable to prove that it has been duly notified, or if 
provisions relating to its notification have not been observed, the document 
shall be deemed to have been notified on the date established by the 
European Patent Office as the date of receipt. 
Rule 126 
Notification by postal services 
(1)144 All notifications by postal services shall be by registered letter.145 
(2) 
Where notification is effected in accordance with paragraph 1, the 
letter shall be deemed to be delivered to the addressee on the tenth day 
following its handover to the postal service provider, unless it has failed to 
reach the addressee or has reached him at a later date; in the event of any 
dispute, it shall be incumbent on the European Patent Office to establish 
that the letter has reached its destination or to establish the date on which 
the letter was delivered to the addressee, as the case may be. 
(3) 
Notification in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be deemed to have 
been effected even if acceptance of the letter has been refused. 
(4) 
To the extent that notification by postal services is not covered by 
paragraphs 1 to 3, the law of the State in which the notification is made 
shall apply. 

72 
Rule 127 
Notification by means of electronic communication 
(1) 
Notification may be effected by means of electronic communication 
as determined by the President of the European Patent Office and under 
the conditions laid down by him. 
(2) 
Where notification is effected by means of electronic communication, 
the electronic document shall be deemed to be delivered to the addressee 
on the tenth day following its transmission, unless it has failed to reach its 
destination or has reached its destination at a later date; in the event of any 
dispute, it shall be incumbent on the European Patent Office to establish 
that the electronic document has reached its destination or to establish the 
date on which it reached its destination, as the case may be. 
Rule 128  
Notification by delivery by hand 
Notification may be effected on the premises of the European Patent Office 
by delivery by hand of the document to the addressee, who shall on 
delivery acknowledge its receipt. Notification shall be deemed to have been 
effected even if the addressee refuses to accept the document or to 
acknowledge receipt thereof. 
Rule 129  
Public notification 
(1)147 If the address of the addressee cannot be established, or if 
notification in accordance with Rule 126, paragraph 1, has proved to be 
impossible even after a second attempt, notification shall be effected by 
public notice. 
(2)148 The President of the European Patent Office shall determine how the 
public notice is to be given and the beginning of the period of one month on 
expiry of which the document shall be deemed to have been notified. 
Rule 130  
Notification to representatives 
(1) 
If a representative has been appointed, notifications shall be 
addressed to him. 
(2) 
If several representatives have been appointed for a single party, 
notification to any one of them shall be sufficient. 



 
 
73 
(3) 
If several parties have a common representative, notification to the 
common representative shall be sufficient. 
Chapter V  
Time limits 
Rule 131  
Calculation of periods 
(1) 
Periods shall be laid down in terms of full years, months, weeks or 
days. 
(2) 
Computation shall start on the day following the day on which the 
relevant event occurred, the event being either a procedural step or the 
expiry of another period. Where the procedural step is a notification, the 
relevant event shall be the receipt of the document notified, unless 
otherwise provided. 
(3) 
When a period is expressed as one year or a certain number of 
years, it shall expire in the relevant subsequent year in the month having 
the same name and on the day having the same number as the month and 
the day on which the said event occurred; if the relevant subsequent month 
has no day with the same number, the period shall expire on the last day of 
that month. 
(4) 
When a period is expressed as one month or a certain number of 
months, it shall expire in the relevant subsequent month on the day which 
has the same number as the day on which the said event occurred; if the 
relevant subsequent month has no day with the same number, the period 
shall expire on the last day of that month. 
(5) 
When a period is expressed as one week or a certain number of 
weeks, it shall expire in the relevant subsequent week on the day having 
the same name as the day on which the said event occurred. 
Rule 132  
Periods specified by the European Patent Office 
(1) 
Where the Convention or these  refer to "a 
period to be specified", this period shall be specified by the European 
Patent Office. 
(2) 
Unless otherwise provided, a period specified by the European Patent 
Office shall be neither less than two months nor more than four months; in 
certain circumstances it may be up to six months. In special cases, the 
period may be extended upon request, presented before the expiry of such 
period. 
Art. 120  
Art. 120  
R. 109, 116 


 
 
74 
Rule 133 
Late receipt of documents 
(1)150 A document received late at the European Patent Office shall be 
deemed to have been received in due time if it was delivered to a 
recognised postal service provider in due time before expiry of the period in 
accordance with the conditions laid down by the President of the European 
Patent Office, unless the document was received later than three months 
after expiry of the period.  
(2) 
Paragraph 1 shall apply mutatis mutandis to any period where 
transactions are carried out with the competent authority in accordance with 
Article 75, paragraphs 1(b) or 2(b). 
Rule 134 
Extension of periods 
(1)152 If a period expires on a day on which one of the filing offices of the 
European Patent Office under Rule 35, paragraph 1, is not open for receipt 
of documents or on which, for reasons other than those referred to in para-
graph 2, mail is not delivered there, the period shall extend to the first day 
thereafter on which all the filing offices are open for receipt of documents 
and on which mail is delivered. The first sentence shall apply mutatis 
mutandis if documents filed by one of the means of electronic 
communication permitted by the President of the European Patent Office 
under Rule 2, paragraph 1, cannot be received. 
(2) 
If a period expires on a day on which there is a general dislocation in 
the delivery or transmission of mail in a Contracting State, the period shall 
extend to the first day following the end of the interval of dislocation for 
parties which are resident in the State concerned or have appointed 
representatives with a place of business in that State. Where the State con-
cerned is the State in which the European Patent Office is located, this 
provision shall apply to all parties and their representatives. This paragraph 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to the period referred to in Rule 37, 
paragraph 2. 
(3) 
Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply mutatis mutandis where acts are 
performed with the competent authority in accordance with Article 75, 
paragraphs 1(b) or 2(b). 
(4) 
The date of commencement and the end of any dislocation under 
paragraph 2 shall be published by the European Patent Office. 
 



 
 
75 
(5) 
Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 to 4, a party concerned may 
produce evidence that on any of the ten days preceding the day of expiry of 
a period the delivery or transmission of mail was dislocated due to an 
exceptional occurrence such as a natural disaster, war, civil disorder, a 
general breakdown in any of the means of electronic communication 
permitted by the President of the European Patent Office under Rule 2, 
paragraph 1, or other like reasons affecting the locality where the party or 
his representative resides or has his place of business. If the evidence 
produced satisfies the European Patent Office, a document received late 
shall be deemed to have been received in due time, provided that the 
mailing or the transmission was effected at the latest on the fifth day after 
the end of the dislocation. 
Rule 135  
Further processing 
(1) 
Further processing under Article 121, paragraph 1, shall be requested 
by payment of the prescribed fee within two months of the communication 
concerning either the failure to observe a time limit or a loss of rights. The 
omitted act shall be completed within the period for making the request. 
(2)153 Further processing shall be ruled out in respect of the periods 
referred to in Article 121, paragraph 4, and of the periods under Rule 6, 
paragraph 1, Rule 16, paragraph 1(a), Rule 31, paragraph 2, Rule 36, 
paragraph 2, Rule 40, paragraph 3, Rule 51, paragraphs 2 to 5, Rule 52, 
paragraphs 2 and 3, 55, 56, Rule 56a, paragraphs 1 and 3 to 7, Rules 58, 
59, 62a, 63, 64, Rule 112, paragraph 2, and Rule 164, paragraphs 1 and 2. 
(3) 
The department competent to decide on the omitted act shall decide 
on the request for further processing. 
Rule 136  
Re-establishment of rights 
(1) 
Any request for re-establishment of rights under Article 122, 
paragraph 1, shall be filed in writing within two months of the removal of the 
cause of non-compliance with the period, but at the latest within one year of 
expiry 
of 
the 
unobserved 
time 
limit. 
However, 
a 
request 
for 
re-establishment of rights in respect of any of the periods specified in 
Article 87, paragraph 1, and in Article 112a, paragraph 4, shall be filed 
within two months of expiry of that period. The request for re-establishment 
of rights shall not be deemed to have been filed until the prescribed fee has 
been paid. 
(2) 
The request shall state the grounds on which it is based and shall set 
out the facts on which it relies. The omitted act shall be completed within 
the relevant period for filing the request according to paragraph 1. 
(3) 
Re-establishment of rights shall be ruled out in respect of any period 
for which further processing under Article 121 is available and in respect of 
the period for requesting re-establishment of rights. 
 
 
 
76 
(4) 
The department competent to decide on the omitted act shall decide 
on the request for re-establishment of rights. 
Chapter VI  
Amendments and corrections 
Rule 137  
Amendment of the European patent application 
(1) 
Before receiving the European search report, the applicant may not 
amend the description, claims or drawings of a European patent application 
unless otherwise provided. 
(2) 
Together with any comments, corrections or amendments made in 
response to communications by the European Patent Office under 
Rule 70a, paragraph 1 or 2, or Rule 161, paragraph 1, the applicant may 
amend the description, claims and drawings of his own volition. 
(3) 
No further amendment may be made without the consent of the 
Examining Division. 
(4) 
When filing any amendments referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3, the 
applicant shall identify them and indicate the basis for them in the 
application as filed. If the Examining Division notes a failure to meet either 
requirement, it may request the correction of this deficiency within a period 
of one month. 
(5) 
Amended claims may not relate to unsearched subject-matter which 
does not combine with the originally claimed invention or group of 
inventions to form a single general inventive concept. Nor may they relate 
to subject-matter not searched in accordance with Rule 62a or Rule 63. 
Rule 138  
Different claims, description and drawings for different States 
If the European Patent Office is informed of the existence of a prior right 
under Article 139, paragraph 2, the European patent application or 
European patent may, for such State or States, contain claims and, where 
appropriate, a description and drawings which are different from those for 
the other designated States. 
Rule 139  
Correction of errors in documents filed with the European Patent 
Office 
Linguistic errors, errors of transcription and mistakes in any document filed 
with the European Patent Office may be corrected on request. However, if 
the request for such correction concerns the description, claims or 

 
77 
drawings, the correction must be obvious in the sense that it is immediately 
evident that nothing else would have been intended than what is offered as 
the correction.  
Rule 140  
Correction of errors in decisions 
In decisions of the European Patent Office, only linguistic errors, errors of 
transcription and obvious mistakes may be corrected. 
Chapter VII  
Information on prior art 
Rule 141  
Information on prior art 
(1) 
An applicant claiming priority within the meaning of Article 87 shall file 
a copy of the results of any search carried out by the authority with which 
the previous application was filed together with the European patent 
application, in the case of a Euro-PCT application on entry into the 
European phase, or without delay after such results have been made 
available to him. 
(2)160 The copy referred to in paragraph 1 shall be deemed to be duly filed if 
it is available to the European Patent Office and to be included in the file of 
the European patent application under the conditions determined by the 
President of the European Patent Office. 
(3) 
Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2, the European Patent Office 
may invite the applicant to provide, within a period of two months, 
information on prior art within the meaning of Article 124, paragraph 1. 

 
78 
Chapter VIII  
Interruption of proceedings 
Rule 142 
Interruption of proceedings 
(1) 
Proceedings before the European Patent Office shall be interrupted: 
(a) 
in the event of the death or legal incapacity of the applicant for or 
proprietor of a European patent or of the person authorised by national law 
to act on his behalf. To the extent that the above events do not affect the 
authorisation of a representative appointed under Article 134, proceedings 
shall be interrupted only on application by such representative; 
(b) 
in the event of the applicant for or proprietor of a patent, as a result of 
some action taken against his property, being prevented by legal reasons 
from continuing the proceedings; 
(c) 
in the event of the death or legal incapacity of the representative of an 
applicant for or proprietor of a patent, or of his being prevented for legal 
reasons resulting from action taken against his property from continuing the 
proceedings. 
(2)162  When, in the cases referred to in paragraph 1(a) or (b), the European 
Patent Office has been informed of the identity of the person authorised to 
continue the proceedings, it shall notify such person and, where applicable, 
any third party, that the proceedings will be resumed as from a specified 
date. If, three years after the publication of the date of interruption in the 
European Patent Bulletin, the European Patent Office has not been 
informed of the identity of the person authorised to continue the 
proceedings, it may set a date on which it intends to resume the 
proceedings of its own motion. 
(3) 
In the case referred to in paragraph 1(c), the proceedings shall be 
resumed when the European Patent Office has been informed of the 
appointment of a new representative of the applicant or when the Office 
has informed the other parties of the appointment of a new representative 
of the proprietor of the patent. If, three months after the beginning of the 
interruption of the proceedings, the European Patent Office has not been 
informed of the appointment of a new representative, it shall communicate 
to the applicant for or proprietor of the patent: 
(a) 
where Article 133, paragraph 2, is applicable, that the European 
patent application will be deemed to be withdrawn or the European patent 
will be revoked if the information is not submitted within two months of this 
communication; or 
(b) 
otherwise, that the proceedings will be resumed with the applicant for 
or proprietor of the patent as from the notification of this communication. 


 
 
79 
(4) 
Any periods, other than those for requesting examination and paying 
renewal fees, in force at the date of interruption of the proceedings, shall 
begin again as from the day on which the proceedings are resumed. If such 
date is less than two months before the end of the period within which the 
request for examination must be filed, such a request may be filed within 
two months of such date. 
Chapter IX  
Information to the public 
Rule 143  
Entries in the European Patent Register 
(1) 
The European Patent Register shall contain the following entries: 
(a) 
number of the European patent application; 
(b) 
date of filing of the application; 
(c) 
title of the invention; 
(d) 
classification symbols assigned to the application; 
(e) 
the Contracting States designated; 
(f) 
particulars of the applicant for or proprietor of the patent as provided 
in Rule 41, paragraph 2(c); 
(g)164 family name, given names and country and place of residence of the 
inventor designated by the applicant for or proprietor of the patent, unless 
he has waived his right to be mentioned under Rule 20, paragraph 1; 
(h) 
particulars of the representative of the applicant for or proprietor of 
the patent as provided in Rule 41, paragraph 2(d); in the case of several 
representatives only the particulars of the representative first named, 
followed by the words "and others" and, in the case of an association 
referred to in Rule 152, paragraph 11, only the name and address of the 
association; 
(i) 
priority data (date, State and file number of the previous application); 
(j) 
in the event of a division of the application, the numbers of all the 
divisional applications; 
(k) 
in the case of a divisional application or a new application under 
Article 61, 
paragraph 1(b), 
the 
information 
referred 
to 
in 
sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (i) with regard to the earlier application;  
 
 
80 
(l) 
date of publication of the application and, where appropriate, date of 
the separate publication of the European search report; 
(m) date of filing of the request for examination; 
(n) 
date on which the application is refused, withdrawn or deemed to be 
withdrawn; 
(o) 
date of publication of the mention of the grant of the European patent; 
(p) 
date of lapse of the European patent in a Contracting State during the 
opposition period and, where appropriate, pending a final decision on 
opposition; 
(q) 
date of filing opposition; 
(r) 
date and purport of the decision on opposition; 
(s) 
dates of stay and resumption of proceedings in the cases referred to 
in Rules 14 and 78; 
(t) 
dates of interruption and resumption of proceedings in the case 
referred to in Rule 142; 
(u) 
date of re-establishment of rights where an entry has been made 
under sub-paragraphs (n) or (r);  
(v) 
the filing of a request for conversion under Article 135, paragraph 3;  
(w) 
rights and transfer of such rights relating to an application or a 
European patent where these  provide that they 
shall be recorded. 
(x) 
date and purport of the decision on the request for limitation or 
revocation of the European patent; 
(y) 
date and purport of the decision of the Enlarged Board of Appeal on 
the petition for review. 
(2)165 The President of the European Patent Office may decide that entries 
other than those referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made in the European 
Patent Register. 
 



 
 
81 
Rule 144 
Parts of the file excluded from inspection 
The parts of the file excluded from inspection under Article 128, 
paragraph 4, shall be: 
(a) 
the documents relating to the exclusion of or objections to members 
of the Boards of Appeal or of the Enlarged Board of Appeal; 
(b) 
draft decisions and notices, and all other documents, used for the 
preparation of decisions and notices, which are not communicated to the 
parties; 
(c) 
the designation of the inventor, if he has waived his right to be 
mentioned under Rule 20, paragraph 1; 
(d) 
any other document excluded from inspection by the President of the 
European Patent Office on the ground that such inspection would not serve 
the purpose of informing the public about the European patent application 
or the European patent. 
Rule 145  
Procedures for the inspection of files 
(1) 
Inspection of the files of European patent applications and patents 
shall either be of the original document, or of copies thereof, or of technical 
means of storage if the files are stored in this way. 
(2) 
The President of the European Patent Office shall determine all file-
inspection arrangements, including the circumstances in which an 
administrative fee is payable. 
Rule 146  
Communication of information contained in the files 
Subject to the restrictions laid down in Article 128, paragraphs 1 to 4, and in 
Rule 144, the European Patent Office may, upon request, communicate 
information concerning any file relating to a European patent application or 
European patent, subject to the payment of an administrative fee. However, 
the European Patent Office may refer to the option of file inspection where 
it deems this to be appropriate in view of the quantity of information to be 
supplied. 
 




 
 
82 
Rule 147  
Constitution, maintenance and preservation of files 
(1) 
The European Patent Office shall constitute, maintain and preserve 
files relating to all European patent applications and patents in electronic 
form. 
(2) 
The President of the European Patent Office shall determine all 
necessary technical and administrative arrangements relating to the 
management of electronic files according to paragraph 1. 
(3) 
Documents incorporated in an electronic file shall be considered to be 
originals. The initial paper version of such documents shall only be 
destroyed after expiry of at least five years. This preservation period starts 
at the end of the year in which the document was incorporated in the 
electronic file. 
(4) 
Any files shall be preserved for at least five years from the end of the 
year in which: 
(a) 
the application is refused or withdrawn or is deemed to be withdrawn; 
(b) 
the patent is revoked by the European Patent Office; or 
(c) 
the patent or the corresponding protection under Article 63, 
paragraph 2, lapses in the last of the designated States.  
(5) 
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, files relating to applications which 
have given rise to divisional applications under Article 76 or new 
applications under Article 61, paragraph 1(b), shall be preserved for at least 
the same period as the files relating to any one of these last applications. 
The same shall apply to files relating to any resulting European patents. 
Chapter X  
Legal and administrative co-operation 
Rule 148  
Communications between the European Patent Office and the 
authorities of the Contracting States 
(1) 
Communications between the European Patent Office and the central 
industrial property offices of the Contracting States which arise out of the 
application of this Convention shall be effected directly between these 
authorities. Communications between the European Patent Office and the 
courts or other authorities of the Contracting States may be effected 
through the intermediary of the said central industrial property offices. 
 
 
 
83 
(2) 
Expenditure in respect of communications under paragraph 1 shall be 
borne by the authority making the communications, which shall be exempt 
from fees. 
Rule 149  
Inspection of files by or via courts or authorities of the Contracting 
States 
(1) 
Inspection of the files of European patent applications or of European 
patents by courts or authorities of the Contracting States shall be of the 
original documents or of copies thereof; Rule 145 shall not apply. 
(2) 
Courts or Public Prosecutors' offices of the Contracting States may, in 
the course of their proceedings, communicate to third parties files or copies 
thereof transmitted to them by the European Patent Office. Such 
communications shall be effected in accordance with Article 128 and shall 
not be subject to any fee. 
(3) 
The European Patent Office shall, when transmitting the files, draw 
attention to the restrictions which may, under Article 128, paragraphs 1 
and 4, apply to file inspection by third parties. 
Rule 150  
Procedure for letters rogatory 
(1) 
Each Contracting State shall designate a central authority to receive 
letters rogatory issued by the European Patent Office and to transmit them 
to the court or authority competent to execute them. 
(2) 
The European Patent Office shall draw up letters rogatory in the 
language of the competent court or authority or shall attach to such letters 
rogatory a translation into that language. 
(3) 
Subject to paragraphs 5 and 6, the competent court or authority shall 
apply national law as to the procedures to be followed in executing such 
requests and, in particular, as to the appropriate measures of compulsion. 
(4) 
If the court or authority to which the letters rogatory are transmitted is 
not competent to execute them, the letters rogatory shall be sent forthwith 
to the central authority referred to in paragraph 1. That authority shall 
transmit the letters rogatory either to the competent court or authority in that 
State, or to the European Patent Office where no court or authority is 
competent in that State. 
(5) 
The European Patent Office shall be informed of the time when, and 
the place where, the enquiry or other legal measure is to take place and 
shall inform the parties, witnesses and experts concerned. 
(6) 
If so requested by the European Patent Office, the competent court or 
authority shall permit the attendance of members of the department 
concerned and allow them to question any person giving evidence either 
directly or through the competent court or authority. 
(7) 
The execution of letters rogatory shall not give rise to any 
reimbursement of fees or costs of any nature. Nevertheless, the State in 
Art. 131 
Art. 117, 131 


 
 
84 
which letters rogatory are executed has the right to require the Organisation 
to reimburse any fees paid to experts or interpreters and the costs arising 
from the procedure under paragraph 6. 
(8) 
If the law applied by the competent court or authority obliges the 
parties to secure evidence and the competent court or authority is not able 
itself to execute the letters rogatory, that court or authority may, with the 
consent of the European Patent Office, appoint a suitable person to do so. 
When seeking such consent, the competent court or authority shall indicate 
the approximate costs which would result from this procedure. If the 
European Patent Office gives its consent, the Organisation shall reimburse 
any costs incurred; otherwise, the Organisation shall not be liable for such 
costs.  
Chapter XI  
Representation 
Rule 151  
Appointment of a common representative 
(1) 
If there is more than one applicant and the request for grant of a 
European patent does not name a common representative, the applicant 
first named in the request shall be deemed to be the common 
representative. However, if one of the applicants is obliged to appoint a 
professional representative, this representative shall be deemed to be the 
common representative, unless the applicant first named has appointed a 
professional representative. The same shall apply to third parties acting in 
common in filing a notice of opposition or intervention and to joint 
proprietors of a European patent. 
(2) 
If the European patent application is transferred to more than one 
person, and such persons have not appointed a common representative, 
paragraph 1 shall apply mutatis mutandis. If such application is not 
possible, the European Patent Office shall invite such persons to appoint a 
common representative within a period to be specified. If this invitation is 
not complied with, the European Patent Office shall appoint the common 
representative. 
Rule 152  
Authorisations 
(1)171  The President of the European Patent Office shall determine the 
cases in which a signed authorisation shall be filed by representatives 
acting before the European Patent Office. 
(2) 
Where a representative fails to file such an authorisation, the 
European Patent Office shall invite him to do so within a period to be 
specified. The authorisation may cover one or more European patent 
 
 
85 
applications or European patents and shall be filed in the corresponding 
number of copies.  
(3) 
Where the requirements of Article 133, paragraph 2, have not been 
satisfied, the same period shall be specified for the appointment of a 
representative and the filing of the authorisation. 
(4)172 A general authorisation may be filed enabling a representative to act 
in respect of all the patent transactions of a party. A single copy shall 
suffice. 
(5) 
The President of the European Patent Office may determine the form 
and content of: 
(a) 
an authorisation relating to the representation of persons under 
Article 133, paragraph 2; 
(b) 
a general authorisation. 
(6) 
If a required authorisation is not filed in due time, any procedural 
steps taken by the representative, other than the filing of a European patent 
application, shall be deemed not to have been taken, without prejudice to 
any other legal consequences provided for by this Convention. 
(7) 
Paragraphs 2 and 4 shall apply to the withdrawal of an authorisation.  
(8) 
A representative shall be deemed to be authorised until the 
termination of his authorisation has been communicated to the European 
Patent Office. 
(9) 
Unless it expressly provides otherwise, an authorisation shall not 
terminate vis-à-vis the European Patent Office upon the death of the 
person who gave it. 
(10)173 If a party appoints several representatives, they may act either 
jointly or singly, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in the 
communication of their appointment or in the authorisation. 
(11)174 The authorisation of an association of representatives shall be 
deemed to be an authorisation of any representative who can provide 
evidence that he practises within that association. 
 
 
 
86 
Rule 153  
Attorney-client evidentiary privilege175 
(1)176 Where advice is sought from a professional representative in his 
capacity as such, all communications between the professional rep-
resentative and his client or any other person, relating to that purpose and 
falling under Article 2 of the Regulation on discipline for professional 
representatives, are permanently privileged from disclosure in proceedings 
before the European Patent Office, unless such privilege is expressly 
waived by the client. 
(2) 
Such privilege from disclosure shall apply, in particular, to any 
communication or document relating to: 
(a) 
the assessment of the patentability of an invention; 
(b) 
the preparation or prosecution of a European patent application;  
(c) 
any opinion relating to the validity, scope of protection or infringement 
of a European patent or a European patent application. 
Rule 154 
Amendment of the list of professional representatives 
(1)178 The entry of a professional representative shall be deleted from the 
list of professional representatives if he so requests or if, despite a 
reminder, he fails to pay the applicable annual subscription to the Institute 
within five months from either: 
(a) 
1 January for members on the list at that date; or 
(b) 
the date of entry for members entered on the list after 1 January of 
the year for which the subscription is due. 
(2) 
Without prejudice to any disciplinary measures taken under 
Article 134a, paragraph 1(c), the entry of a professional representative may 
be deleted ex officio only: 
(a) 
in the event of his death or legal incapacity; 
(b) 
where he is no longer a national of one of the Contracting States, 
unless he was granted an exemption under Article 134, paragraph 7(a); 
(c) 
where he no longer has his place of business or employment within 
one of the Contracting States. 
 



 
 
87 
(3) 
Any person entered on the list of professional representatives under 
Article 134, paragraphs (2) or (3), whose entry has been deleted shall, 
upon request, be re-entered on that list if the conditions for deletion no 
longer exist.  


 
 
88 
PART VIII  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART VIII OF THE CONVENTION 
Rule 155  
Filing and transmission of the request for conversion 
(1) 
The request for conversion referred to in Article 135, paragraph 1(a) 
or (b), shall be filed within three months of the withdrawal of the European 
patent application, or of the communication that the application is deemed 
to be withdrawn, or of the decision refusing the application or revoking the 
European patent. The effect of the European patent application under 
Article 66 shall lapse if the request is not filed in due time. 
(2) 
When transmitting the request for conversion to the central industrial 
property offices of the Contracting States specified in the request, the 
central industrial property office concerned or the European Patent Office 
shall attach to the request a copy of the file relating to the European patent 
application or European patent. 
(3)179 Article 135, paragraph 4, shall apply if the request for conversion 
referred to in Article 135, paragraphs 1(a) and (2), is not transmitted before 
the expiry of a period of twenty months from the date of filing or, if priority 
has been claimed, the date of priority. 
Rule 156  
Information to the public in the event of conversion 
(1) 
The documents accompanying the request for conversion under 
Rule 155, paragraph 2, shall be made available to the public by the central 
industrial property office under the same conditions and to the same extent 
as documents relating to national proceedings.  
(2) 
The printed specification of the national patent resulting from the 
conversion of a European patent application shall mention that application. 
 


 
 
89 
PART IX  
IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS TO PART X OF THE CONVENTION 
Rule 157  
The European Patent Office as a receiving Office 
(1) 
The European Patent Office shall be competent to act as a receiving 
Office within the meaning of the PCT if the applicant is a resident or 
national of a Contracting State to this Convention and to the PCT. Without 
prejudice to paragraph 3, if the applicant chooses the European Patent 
Office as a receiving Office, the international application shall be filed 
directly with the European Patent Office. Article 75, paragraph 2, shall 
apply mutatis mutandis. 
(2) 
Where the European Patent Office acts as a receiving Office under 
the PCT, the international application shall be filed in English, French or 
German. The President of the European Patent Office may determine that 
the international application and any related item shall be filed in more than 
one copy. 
(3) 
If an international application is filed with an authority of a Contracting 
State for transmittal to the European Patent Office as the receiving Office, 
the Contracting State shall ensure that the application reaches the 
European Patent Office not later than two weeks before the end of the 
thirteenth month from filing or, if priority is claimed, from the date of priority.  
(4) 
The transmittal fee for the international application shall be paid within 
one month of filing the application. 
Rule 158  
The European Patent Office as an International Searching Authority or 
International Preliminary Examining Authority 
(1) 
In the case of Article 17, paragraph 3(a) PCT, an additional 
international search fee shall be paid for each further invention for which an 
international search is to be carried out. 
(2) 
In the case of Article 34, paragraph 3(a) PCT, an additional fee for 
international preliminary examination shall be paid for each further 
invention for which the international preliminary examination is to be carried 
out. 
(3)181 Where an additional fee has been paid under protest, the European 
Patent Office shall examine the protest in accordance with Rule 40.2(c) to 
(e) or Rule 68.3(c) to (e) PCT, subject to payment of the prescribed protest 
 


 
 
90 
fee. Further details concerning the procedure shall be determined by the 
President of the European Patent Office. 
Rule 159
The European Patent Office as a designated or elected Office – 
Requirements for entry into the European phase 
(1) 
In respect of an international application under Article 153, the 
applicant shall perform the following acts within thirty-one months from the 
date of filing of the application or, if priority has been claimed, from the 
priority date: 
(a)183 supply, where applicable, the translation of the international 
application required under Article 153, paragraph 4; 
(b) 
specify the application documents, as originally filed or as amended, 
on which the European grant procedure is to be based; 
(c) 
pay the filing fee provided for in Article 78, paragraph 2;  
(d)184, 185 
pay the designation fee if the period under Rule 39 has 
expired earlier; 
(e) 
pay the search fee, where a supplementary European search report 
has to be drawn up;  
(f) 
file the request for examination provided for in Article 94, if the period 
under Rule 70, paragraph 1, has expired earlier; 
(g) 
pay the renewal fee in respect of the third year provided for in 
Article 86, paragraph 1, if the fee has fallen due earlier under Rule 51, 
paragraph 1; 
(h) 
file, where applicable, the certificate of exhibition referred to in 
Article 55, paragraph 2, and Rule 25. 
(2) 
The Examining Division shall be competent to take decisions of the 
European Patent Office under Article 25, paragraph 2(a) PCT.  
Rule 160
Consequences of non-fulfilment of certain requirements 
(1) 
If either the translation of the international application or the request 
for examination is not filed in due time, or if the filing fee, the search fee or 
the designation fee is not paid in due time, the European patent application 
shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
 

 
 
91 
(2)187 If the European Patent Office notes that the application is deemed to 
be withdrawn under paragraph 1, it shall communicate this to the applicant. 
Rule 112, paragraph 2, shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
Rule 161  
Amendment of the application 
(1) 
If the European Patent Office has acted as the International 
Searching Authority and, where a demand under Article 31 PCT was filed, 
also as the International Preliminary Examining Authority for a Euro-PCT 
application, it shall give the applicant the opportunity to comment on the 
written opinion of the International Searching Authority or the International 
Preliminary Examination Report and, where appropriate, invite him to 
correct any deficiencies noted in the written opinion or in the International 
Preliminary Examination Report and to amend the description, claims and 
drawings within a period of six months from the respective communication. 
If the European Patent Office has drawn up a supplementary international 
search report, an invitation in accordance with the first sentence shall be 
issued in respect of the explanations given in accordance with Rule 
45bis.7(e) PCT. If the applicant does not comply with or comment on an 
invitation in accordance with the first or second sentence, the application 
shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
(2) 
Where the European Patent Office draws up a supplementary 
European search report on a Euro-PCT application, the application may be 
amended once within a period of six months from a communication 
informing the applicant accordingly. The application as amended shall 
serve as the basis for the supplementary European search. 
Rule 162  
Claims incurring fees 
(1) 
If the application documents on which the European grant procedure 
is to be based comprise more than fifteen claims, claims fees shall be paid 
for the sixteenth and each subsequent claim as laid down in the Rules 
relating to Fees within the period under Rule 159, paragraph 1. 
(2)190 If the claims fees are not paid in due time, they may still be paid 
within the period under Rule 161, paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, as the case 
may be. If within this period amended claims are filed, the claims fees due 
shall be computed on the basis of such amended claims and shall be paid 
within this period. 
 

 
92 
(3) 
Any claims fees paid within the period under paragraph 1 and in 
excess of those due under paragraph 2, second sentence, shall be 
refunded. 
(4) 
Where a claims fee is not paid in due time, the claim concerned shall 
be deemed to be abandoned. 
Rule 163  
Examination of certain formal requirements by the European Patent 
Office 
(1) 
Where the designation of the inventor under Rule 19, paragraph 1, 
has not yet been made within the period under Rule 159, paragraph 1, the 
European Patent Office shall invite the applicant to make the designation 
within two months. 
(2)191 Where the priority of an earlier application is claimed and the file 
number of the previous application or the copy thereof provided for in 
Rule 52, paragraph 1, and Rule 53 have not yet been submitted within the 
period under Rule 159, paragraph 1, the European Patent Office shall invite 
the applicant to furnish that number or copy within two months. Rule 53, 
paragraph 2, shall apply. 
(3)192 Where, at the expiry of the period under Rule 159, paragraph 1, a 
sequence listing complying with the standard provided for in the 
Administrative Instructions under the PCT is not available to the European 
Patent Office, the applicant shall be invited to file a sequence listing 
complying with the rules laid down by the President of the European Patent 
Office within two months. Rule 30, paragraphs 2 and 3, shall apply mutatis 
mutandis. 
(4) 
Where, at the expiry of the period under Rule 159, paragraph 1, the 
address, the nationality or the State in which his residence or principal 
place of business is located is missing in respect of any applicant, the 
European Patent Office shall invite the applicant to furnish these indications 
within two months. 
(5) 
Where, at the expiry of the period under Rule 159, paragraph 1, the 
requirements of Article 133, paragraph 2, have not been satisfied, the 
European Patent Office shall invite the applicant to appoint a professional 
representative within two months.  
(6) 
If the deficiencies noted under paragraphs 1, 4 or 5 are not corrected 
in due time, the European patent application shall be refused. If the 

 
93 
deficiency noted under paragraph 2 is not corrected in due time, the right of 
priority shall be lost for the application. 
Rule 164  
Unity of invention and further searches 
(1) 
If the European Patent Office considers that the application 
documents which are to serve as the basis for the supplementary European 
search do not comply with the requirement of unity of invention, it shall:  
(a) 
draw up a partial supplementary search report on those parts of the 
application which relate to the invention, or the group of inventions within 
the meaning of Article 82, first mentioned in the claims;  
(b) 
inform the applicant that, for the supplementary European search 
report to cover the other inventions, a further search fee must be paid, in 
respect of each invention involved, within a period of two months; and 
(c) 
draw up the supplementary European search report for the parts of 
the application relating to inventions in respect of which search fees have 
been paid. 
(2) 
If the supplementary European search report is dispensed with and 
the Examining Division considers that in the application documents which 
are to serve as the basis for examination an invention, or a group of 
inventions within the meaning of Article 82, is claimed which was not 
searched by the European Patent Office in its capacity as International 
Searching Authority or Authority specified for supplementary international 
search, the Examining Division shall: 
(a) 
inform the applicant that a search will be performed in respect of any 
such invention for which a search fee is paid within a period of two months;  
(b) 
issue the results of any search performed in accordance with 
paragraph (a) together with: 
- 
a communication under Article 94, paragraph 3, and Rule 71, 
paragraphs 1 and 2, in which it shall give the applicant the opportunity to 
comment on these results and to amend the description, claims and 
drawings, or 
- 
a communication under Rule 71, paragraph 3, 
and 
(c) 
where appropriate, in the communication issued under paragraph (b), 
invite the applicant to limit the application to one invention, or group of 
inventions within the meaning of Article 82, for which a search report was 
drawn up by the European Patent Office in its capacity either as 
International 
Searching 
Authority 
or 
as 
Authority 
specified 
for 
 

 
 
94 
supplementary international search, or for which a search was performed in 
accordance with the procedure under paragraph (a). 
(3) 
In the procedure under paragraph 2(a), Rules 62a and 63 shall apply 
mutatis mutandis.  
(4) 
Rule 62 and Rule 70, paragraph 2, shall not apply to the results of 
any search performed in accordance with paragraph 2. 
(5) 
Any fee paid under paragraphs 1 or 2 shall be refunded if the 
applicant requests a refund and the Examining Division finds that the com-
munication under paragraphs 1(b) or 2(a) was not justified. 
Rule 165
The Euro-PCT application as conflicting application under Article 54, 
paragraph 3 
A Euro-PCT application shall be considered as comprised in the state of 
the art under Article 54, paragraph 3, if in addition to the conditions laid 
down in Article 153, paragraph 3 or 4, the filing fee under Rule 159, 
paragraph 1(c) has been paid. 
 
 

