Part A – Chapter I-1 
Chapter I – Introduction 
1. Overview 
Part A of the Guidelines deals with: 
(i) 
the requirements and procedures to be followed in the various 
aspects of the formalities examination of European patent 
applications (chapters A-II to VI) 
(ii) 
formalities matters of a more general nature that can arise during the 
application procedure or post-grant stage (chapters A-VII and VIII) 
(iii) 
the presentation and execution of drawings and figurative 
representations accompanying a European patent application 
(chapter A-IX) 
(iv) 
fee matters (chapter A-X) 
(v) 
inspection of files, communication of information contained in files, 
consultation of the European Patent Register and issue of certified 
copies (chapter A-XI). 
2. Responsibility for formalities examination 
The matters covered in this part are intended for EPO formalities staff at all 
sites (The Hague, Munich and Berlin) and in particular for the Receiving 
Section, which is specifically responsible under the EPC for ensuring that 
the formal requirements for European patent applications are met. Once an 
application is transferred to the examining division, the latter accepts 
responsibility for the formalities of the application, although it should be 
understood that the term "examining division" is intended to include the 
formalities officer to whom this work is entrusted (see the decisions of the 
President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, OJ EPO 2014, A6, 
23 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A104, and 14 June 2020, OJ EPO 
2020, A80). 
3. Purpose of Part A 
This part of the Guidelines is intended to provide formalities officers with 
the knowledge and background to help them carry out their duties efficiently 
and uniformly. It does not override the EPC (see, in particular, section 3 of 
the General Part). 
4. Other parts relating to formalities 
Formalities officers should not concern themselves with only Part A of the 
Guidelines. They will need to refer frequently to the other parts and in 
particular Part E, where appropriate. 
Rule 10 
Rule 11(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter II-1 
Chapter II – Filing of applications and 
examination on filing 
1. Where and how applications may be filed 
European patent applications must be filed in writing. They may be filed by 
means of electronic communication (see A-II, 1.1) or by delivery by hand or 
by postal services (see A-II, 1.2). 
1.1 Filing of applications by means of electronic communication 
1.1.1 Filing of applications in electronic form 
European patent applications and international (PCT) applications may be 
filed electronically with the EPO (see the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A48) using either 
(i) 
EPO Online Filing (OLF), by packaging and submitting the 
documents using the software provided by the EPO (see the decision 
of the President of the EPO dated 24 November 2023 concerning the 
version of the EPO Online Filing software to the used for the 
electronic filing of documents, OJ EPO 2023, A96) unless the use of 
other software is permitted. Filings using OLF may be made online or 
on electronic data carriers accepted by the EPO. At present, they are 
CD-R discs conforming to the ISO 9660 standard and DVD-R or 
DVD+R discs (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A48) 
(ii) 
Online Filing 2.0 
(iii) 
the EPO web-form filing service or 
(iv) 
the EPO Contingency Upload Service. 
Other documents may also be filed electronically in proceedings under the 
EPC (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 3 May 2023, 
OJ EPO 2023, A48). 
Certain procedural acts may be filed electronically using the MyEPO 
Portfolio service (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
9 October 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A89, the notice from the EPO dated 
9 October 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A90, and the notice from the EPO dated 
3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A50). Currently, only those documents 
specified in the above decision or in an announcement on the EPO website 
or in the EPO Official Journal may be filed using this service. 
European patent applications may also be filed electronically with the 
competent national authorities of those contracting states that permit this. 
1.1.2 Filing of applications by fax 
Applications may also be filed by fax with the EPO's filing offices in Munich, 
The Hague or Berlin (see A-II, 1.2) or with the competent national 
authorities of contracting states that permit this, namely – at present – 
Rule 1 
Rule 2(1) 
Part A – Chapter II-2 

 
Austria (AT), 
Bulgaria (BG), 
Czech 
Republic (CZ), 
Estonia (EE), 
Finland (FI), 
France (FR), 
Germany (DE), 
Iceland (IS), 
Ireland (IE), 
Luxembourg (LU), 
Monaco (MC), 
Norway (NO), 
Portugal (PT), 
Slovenia (SI), Sweden (SE) and United Kingdom (GB). For further details, 
see the latest version of the booklet "National law relating to the EPC" 
available on the EPO website (epo.org). 
If a faxed application is illegible or incomplete, it is to be treated as not 
having been received to the extent that it is illegible or that the attempted 
transmission failed, and the sender must be notified as soon as possible 
(see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, 
OJ EPO 2019, A18). 
If a European patent application is filed by fax, a written confirmation is 
required only where the documents are of inferior quality. In this case, the 
EPO will invite the applicant to supply such documents within two months 
(Rule 2(1)). If the applicant fails to comply with this invitation in due time, 
the European patent application will be refused. To prevent duplication of 
files, applicants are asked to indicate on the paper version of the 
application documents the application number or fax date and the name of 
the authority with which the documents were filed and to make it clear that 
these documents represent "confirmation of an application filed by fax". 
1.2 Filing of applications by delivery by hand or by postal services 
European patent applications may be filed by delivery by hand or by postal 
services at the EPO's filing offices in Munich, The Hague or Berlin. The 
EPO's sub-office in Vienna is not a filing office, nor is the Brussels Bureau. 
The opening hours of the EPO's filing offices are published in the notice 
from the EPO dated 14 February 2018, OJ EPO 2018, A18. Dates on which 
at least one of the filing offices is not open to receive documents are 
announced at regular intervals in the EPO Official Journal (see also 
E-VIII, 1.4). The filing offices may remain open during public holidays 
observed in the contracting states in which they are located. Since mail is 
not delivered on these days (see also E-VIII, 1.4), applications may be filed 
by delivery by hand or using other permitted means of filing (see A-II, 1.1; 
A-II, 1.3). 
The EPO filing offices in Berlin and Munich's PschorrHöfe building (see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 3 January 2017, OJ EPO 2017, 
A11) are equipped with automated mailboxes, which may be used at any 
time. The automated mailbox facility is currently not available at the filing 
offices in Munich's Isar building and The Hague. Outside office hours 
documents may be handed in to the porter. 
European patent applications (with the exception of divisional applications, 
see A-IV, 1.3.1, and applications according to Art. 61(1)(b), see A-IV, 2.5) 
may also be filed at the central industrial property office or other competent 
authority of a contracting state if permitted by that state's national law 
(see A-II, 1.6). First filings may need to be filed at national offices 
(see A-II, 3.2 and the booklet "National law relating to the EPC" on 
epo.org). 
Art. 75(1) 
Rule 35(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter II-3 
1.3 Filing of applications by other means 
The filing of European patent applications by other means such as email is 
at present not allowed (see also the notice from the EPO dated 
12 September 2000, OJ EPO 2000, 458). 
1.4 Subsequent filing of documents 
For the subsequent filing of documents, see A-VIII, 2.5. 
1.5 Debit orders for deposit accounts held with the EPO 
For European patent applications, debit orders for the fees due must be 
filed in an accepted electronic format (see A-X, 4.2.3), irrespective of how 
the application itself is filed. If an application is filed with a competent 
national authority (Art. 75(1)(b)) on paper, a paper debit order on 
mandatory Form 1020 for the fees intended to be paid is accepted by way 
of exception if it is included with that application on filing (see the 
Arrangements for deposit accounts (ADA), Supplementary publication 3, 
OJ EPO 2022, Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2023, 10, and the 
decision 
of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
13 June 
2023, 
OJ EPO 2023, A58). Paper Form 1020 is not accepted if filed direct with 
the EPO. 
1.6 Forwarding of applications 
The central industrial property office of a contracting state is obliged to 
forward applications filed (see A-II, 3.2) with it or with other competent 
authorities in that state to the EPO in the shortest time compatible with its 
national law on the secrecy of inventions (for debit order enclosures, 
see A-II, 1.5). 
A time limit of six weeks after filing is specified for the onward transmission 
to the EPO of applications not classified as secret. This is extended to four 
months or, where priority has been claimed, to 14 months after the date of 
priority, for applications requiring further examination as to their 
classification as secret. An application received outside the specified time 
limits, either six weeks or four months, must be processed, provided it is 
received in Munich, The Hague or Berlin before the end of the 14th month 
after filing or, where appropriate, after the date of priority. Applications 
received after 14 months are deemed withdrawn. Re-establishment of 
rights and further processing in respect of the period under Rule 37(2) are 
not possible, since the loss of rights does not result from the applicant's 
failure to observe a time limit (see J 3/80). However, the applicant may file 
a request for conversion under Art. 135(1)(a) (see A-IV, 6). 
If the time limit referred to in Rule 37(2) expires on a day on which the 
delivery or transmission of mail is interrupted or subsequently dislocated 
within the meaning of Rule 134(2), it will extend to the first day following the 
end of the period of interruption or dislocation. 
Point 7.1.2 ADA 
Point 12.1 ADA 
Art. 77(1) 
Rule 37(1) 
Art. 77(3) 
Rule 37(2) 
Art. 135(1)(a) 
Rule 134(2) 
Part A – Chapter II-4 

 
1.7 Application numbering systems 
1.7.1 Applications filed before 1 January 2002 
For applications filed before 1 January 2002, the following numbering 
system applies: 
The application number consists of nine digits. The first two digits (from left 
to right) indicate the filing year. The last (ninth) digit is a check digit. The 
third digit or third and fourth digits indicate(s) the place of filing. 
The remaining digits are used for consecutively numbering the applications 
in the order in which they arrive at the place of filing. 
International applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) 
and designating "EP" (Euro-PCT applications) receive the digit "7", "8" or 
"9" as the third digit. 
1.7.2 Applications filed on or after 1 January 2002 
For applications filed on or after 1 January 2002, the following numbering 
system applies: 
The application number consists of nine digits. The first two digits (from left 
to right) indicate the filing year. The last digit is a check digit. The remaining 
six digits in between are used for consecutively numbering the applications 
in the order in which they arrive at the place of filing, starting from the 
lowest number within a specific range of six-digit numbers. The specific 
range reflects the place of filing. Where applicable, the range is subdivided 
into two ranges to distinguish between online and paper filings. 
For international applications designating "EP" (Euro-PCT applications), the 
dedicated range for the six-digit number within the application number uses 
"7", "8" or "9" as the third digit and does not reflect the place or method of 
filing. 
A list of the number ranges introduced in 2002, along with, where 
appropriate, the corresponding places of filing, is published in 
OJ EPO 2001, 465. 
2. 
Persons entitled to file an application 
A European patent application may be filed by any natural or legal person, 
or any body equivalent to a legal person by virtue of the law governing it. 
For the purposes of proceedings before the EPO, the applicant will be 
deemed to be entitled to exercise the right to the European patent. 
The application may be in the name of one person or several persons may 
be named as joint applicants. The application may also be filed by two or 
more applicants designating different contracting states. It may arise that a 
first applicant designates one group of contracting states and a second 
designates a different group of contracting states, while both applicants 
jointly designate a third group of contracting states. If the applicants for a 
patent are not the same for different contracting states they will be 
Art. 58 
Art. 60(3) 
Art. 59 
Art. 118 
 

Part A – Chapter II-5 
regarded as joint applicants in proceedings before the EPO (see A-III, 4.2.1 
and 11.1 on when and under what circumstances the matter dealt with in 
this paragraph must be considered during formalities examination). 
If a national court finds that a person other than the applicant is entitled to 
the grant of a European patent that person has the option of prosecuting 
the application as their own application in place of the applicant 
(see A-IV, 2). 
3. Procedure on filing 
3.1 Receipt; confirmation 
The receipt of European patent applications filed via EPO Online Filing, 
Online Filing 2.0 or the EPO web-form filing service is acknowledged 
electronically following submission. Where it becomes apparent that the 
acknowledgment's transmission failed, the authority with which the 
application was filed promptly transmits the acknowledgment by other 
means where possible on the basis of the information supplied (see Art. 13 
of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 3 May 2023, OJ EPO 
2023, A48). 
The receipt of European patent applications filed using the EPO 
Contingency Upload Service is confirmed electronically by the EPO in the 
service itself. An acknowledgment of receipt indicating the application 
number assigned is sent separately in accordance with the provisions 
governing the filing of documents on paper (see following paragraph). 
The acknowledgement of receipt of European patent applications filed on 
paper (usually the last page of EPO Form 1001) is issued by the authority 
with which the application is filed – either the EPO (Munich, The Hague or 
Berlin) or the competent national authority. The receipt must be issued 
without delay and include the application number and the date of receipt.  
3.2 Filing with a competent national authority 
If the application is filed with a competent national authority, that authority 
must inform the EPO without delay of receipt of the documents making up 
the application and indicate the nature and date of receipt of the 
documents, the application number and any priority date claimed. It is 
recommended that the authority should also indicate the applicant's or 
representative's reference number, where provided. In practice, the EPO 
receives the above information when the actual application is forwarded to 
it unless national security checks by the national authority delay the 
forwarding of the application, in which case a separate notice is sent by that 
authority to the EPO. 
When the EPO receives an application forwarded by the national authority 
of a contracting state, it notifies the applicant, indicating the date of receipt 
at the EPO. Once this communication has been received, all further 
documents relating to the application must be sent direct to the EPO. 
Art. 61(1) 
Rule 35(2) 
Rule 35(3) 
Rule 35(4) 
Part A – Chapter II-6 

 
Where an application is not received by the EPO from the national authority 
of a contracting state before the end of the 14th month after filing or, if 
priority has been claimed, after the date of priority and is consequently 
deemed withdrawn (see A-II, 1.6), the applicant must be notified 
accordingly; all fees must be refunded, including any fees paid in advance 
of their due date. 
4. 
Examination on filing 
4.1 Minimum requirements for according a date of filing 
The EPO examines applications to determine whether they meet the 
minimum requirements for according a date of filing. This is done by the 
Receiving Section. These requirements are satisfied where the documents 
filed contain: 
(a) 
an indication that a European patent is sought 
(b) 
information identifying the applicant or allowing the applicant to be 
contacted 
(c) 
a description or reference to a single previously filed application. 
It is not necessary for the applicant to provide any claims to obtain a filing 
date. If the application is filed without claims but satisfies all requirements 
for obtaining a filing date, the applicant will be requested to provide at least 
one claim later according to Rules 57(c) and 58 (see A-III, 15). 
Where the description is filed by reference to a previously filed application 
(see A-II, 4.1.3.1), the reference must contain the following information for 
the application to qualify for a filing date according to Rule 40(2): 
(i) 
the filing date of the previously filed application 
(ii) 
its file number 
(iii) 
the office where it was filed 
(iv) 
an indication that this reference replaces the description and any 
drawings. 
To be accorded a filing date, these documents do not have to meet any 
particular requirements as to form or presentation. They must, however, be 
sufficiently legible to enable the information to be discerned. 
4.1.1 Indication that a European patent is sought 
Applicants must use the prescribed request for grant form (EPO 
Form 1001), which is available in EPO Online Filing and Online Filing 2.0 
(see A-II, 1.1.1) or can be downloaded free of charge from the EPO website 
(epo.org), to meet the requirement referred to in A-II, 4.1(a) to provide "the 
indication that a patent is sought" (see also A-III, 4). 
Art. 77(3) 
Rule 37(2) 
Rule 112(1) 
Art. 90(1) 
Rule 10(1) 
Rule 40(1)(a) 
Rule 40(1)(b) 
Rule 40(1)(c) 
Rule 1 
 

Part A – Chapter II-7 
4.1.2 Information concerning the applicant 
For the purposes of establishing a filing date, information must be supplied 
which: 
(i) 
identifies the applicant or 
(ii) 
allows the applicant to be contacted. 
If there are multiple applicants, the above information has to be supplied for 
only one of them. Any kind of information that allows the applicant to be 
contacted will be considered to fulfil requirement (ii), for example: 
(a) 
the name and address of the applicant's representative 
(b) 
a PO box number 
(c) 
a phone number. 
If the information supplied is sufficient to establish a filing date but not for 
the EPO to establish whether or not the applicant requires a representative 
according to Art. 133(2), the procedure outlined in A-III, 16 will be followed. 
In deciding whether the applicant information supplied satisfies the 
requirements for establishing a filing date, the EPO will take into account all 
data contained in the documents filed (see J 25/86). Objection should not 
be raised at this stage with regard to the status of the applicant or the 
entitlement to apply, or where, in the case of joint applicants, there is doubt 
as to the contracting states designated by the individual applicants. 
4.1.3 Description 
The contents of the description do not require close scrutiny – it is sufficient 
to identify a document (or documents) that appear(s) to include a 
description. If, instead of filing a description, the applicant files a reference 
to a previously filed application, see A-II, 4.1.3.1. 
4.1.3.1 Reference to a previously filed application 
Instead of application documents, the applicant can file a reference to a 
previously filed application under Rule 40(1)(c). The previously filed 
application referenced does not need to be claimed as priority. 
Details required on the filing date 
Under Rule 40(2), to qualify for a filing date, the applicant must indicate the 
following details on the filing date: 
(i) 
the filing date of the previously filed application 
(ii) 
its file number 
(iii) 
the office where it was filed 
Rule 40(2) 
Part A – Chapter II-8 

 
(iv) 
an indication that this reference replaces the description and any 
drawings. 
The previously filed application referenced may also be an application for a 
utility model. 
Copy of the previously filed application 
The applicant must supply a copy of the previously filed application certified 
as correct by the authority with which it was filed within two months of the 
filing date (Rule 40(3)). However, according to Rule 40(3), last sentence, 
this requirement is dispensed with where the previously filed application is 
already available to the EPO under the conditions specified by the 
President. According to the notice from the EPO dated 14 September 2009, 
OJ EPO 2009, 486, a certified copy does not need to be filed where the 
previously filed application is a Euro-direct application or an international 
one filed with the EPO as receiving Office under the PCT. In all other 
cases, a certified copy of the previously filed application referenced must 
be filed within the time limit under Rule 40(3). 
Where the previously filed application referenced is the claimed priority 
application, only one certified copy needs to be filed to satisfy the 
requirements relating to both the filing date (Rule 40(3)) and the priority 
claim (Rule 53(1), see A-III, 6.7). 
For divisional applications filed by reference, see A-IV, 1.3.1. 
Translation of the previously filed application 
If the previously filed application is not in an official EPO language, the 
applicant must also file a translation into one such language within two 
months of the filing date (Rule 40(3)). If the translation of the previously 
filed application is already available to the EPO, a copy of it will be included 
in the file free of charge and the applicant will not need to file it 
(Rule 40(3)). 
Note that where the previously filed application is in an official language of 
an EPC contracting state according to Art. 14(4), the application may 
qualify for a reduction of the filing fee, provided that the applicant is entitled 
to a reduction according to Rule 6(3) in conjunction with Rule 6(4) to (7) 
(see A-X, 9.2.1 and 9.2.2). The reduction applies even in cases where the 
description is filed by reference to a previously filed application according to 
Rule 40(1)(c), where the previously filed application is in a language 
specified in Art. 14(4) but the claims are filed after the filing date in 
accordance with Rule 57(c) and Rule 58 and in an official EPO language. 
This is because the essential element for establishing a filing date (the 
provision of a description, see Rule 40(1)(c)) has been provided in a 
language giving rise to the entitlement to the reduction (see G 6/91, mutatis 
mutandis). 
Rule 40(3) 
Rule 53(2) 
Rule 40(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter II-9 
The claims 
Applicants can also indicate that the reference to the previously filed 
application should also replace the claims (Rule 57(c)). This must be done 
on the filing date, preferably by selecting the appropriate box on the request 
for grant (EPO Form 1001). In that case, the previously filed application's 
claims will form the basis for the search and, as they satisfy the 
requirement of Rule 57(c), the applicant will not be invited to file claims 
later. 
If applicants do not refer to the previously filed application's claims but only 
to the description and any drawings, they may file a set of claims at the 
same time as the reference (i.e. on the filing date). If they do not do so, the 
Receiving Section will invite them under Rule 58 to file claims 
(see A-III, 15). 
4.1.4 Deficiencies 
If the EPO (Receiving Section) notes either of the following deficiencies: 
– 
Rule 40(1)(a) – no indication that a European patent is sought or 
– 
Rule 40(1)(c) – no description or reference to a previously filed 
application, 
either of which prevents the application being accorded a filing date, it 
communicates this to the applicants and invites them to remedy the 
deficiency within a non-extendable period of two months from notification of 
a communication under Rule 55. If the requirements of Rule 40(1)(a) or 
Rule 40(1)(c), as applicable, are not met at the end of this period, the 
application will not be dealt with as a European patent application. The 
EPO will notify the applicant accordingly under Rule 112(1). In reply, the 
applicant may file a request for a decision under Rule 112(2) 
(see E-VIII, 1.9.3) or request re-establishment of rights under Art. 122 and 
Rule 136 (see E-VIII, 3). 
If none of the available means of redress is filed on time, any fees paid are 
refunded. If the applicant wishes to pursue a European patent application, 
all documents relating to the purported application will have to be re-filed. 
Any such re-filed application will be accorded as the filing date the date on 
which all the requirements of Rule 40 are fulfilled. 
Deficiency under Rule 40(1)(b) 
If the information on the applicants is missing or does not enable the EPO 
to contact them (Rule 40(1)(b)), a communication concerning the deficiency 
cannot be sent. The European patent application will not come into 
existence unless the applicants correct this deficiency on their own initiative 
within two months of the date of receipt of the original documents. In this 
case, the filing date is the date on which all the requirements of Rule 40 are 
met. 
Art. 90(1) and 
(2) 
Rule 55 
Rule 112(1) 
Part A – Chapter II-10 

 
Filing by reference to a previously filed application 
Where the application is filed by reference to a previously filed application 
and the EPO (Receiving Section) notes that any of the following information 
is missing: 
(i) 
the filing date of the previously filed application 
(ii) 
its file number 
(iii) 
the office where it was filed 
(iv) 
an indication that this reference replaces the description and any 
drawings 
then it proceeds as above and invites the applicant to remedy the 
deficiency within a two-month time limit (Rule 55). If the applicant does not 
remedy the deficiencies in due time, the application is not treated as a 
European patent application. 
If the applicant does not provide the certified copy of the previously filed 
application within two months of filing the application (Rule 40(3)) and it is 
not already available to the EPO (see A-II, 4.1.3.1), then a communication 
according to Rule 55 will be sent to the applicant requesting that the 
certified copy be filed within a non-extendable period of two months. If the 
applicant does not provide the certified copy in due time, the application is 
not treated as a European patent application. Where a translation of the 
application is required but is not provided within the above time limit, the 
procedure given in A-III, 14 is followed. The filing date is unaffected by a 
missing translation. 
4.1.5 Date of filing 
The filing date accorded to the application is the date the application meets 
the requirements of Rule 40 and is either: 
(i) 
the date of receipt at the EPO or competent national authority or 
(ii) 
the date, not later than the two-month period referred to in Rule 55, 
on which the applicant rectifies any deficiencies. The applicant is 
informed of the filing date accorded to the application in this case. 
Case (ii) is subject to one exception. Where the application is filed by 
reference to a previously filed application and the applicants fail to file the 
certified copy of the previously filed application within two months of the 
filing date as required by Rule 40(3), an invitation is sent to them to file it 
within two months of a communication according to Rule 55. If they file the 
certified copy within this two-month period, the application maintains its 
original filing date, provided that all other requirements for acquiring a filing 
date have been met. 
The filing date may also change in cases where the applicant inserts 
missing parts of the description or missing drawings under Rule 56 
 

Part A – Chapter II-11 
(see A-II, 5) or corrects erroneously filed parts under Rule 56a (see A-II, 6) 
after the filing date. 
5. Late filing of missing drawings or missing parts of the description 
5.1 Late filing of missing drawings or missing parts of the 
description – on invitation 
The application is examined on filing to check that it is entitled to a filing 
date. If, during this check, the EPO notes that parts of the description or 
drawings appear to be missing, it will invite the applicant to file the missing 
parts within a time limit of two months of a communication under Rule 56(1) 
and Rule 56a(1) (see A-II, 6). During this time limit, the applicant may 
proceed under Rule 56 or Rule 56a. If the applicant does not reply to this 
communication in time, then all references to the missing parts are deemed 
deleted. It should be noted that the applicant may not invoke the omission 
of the communication under Rule 56(1) and Rule 56a(1). 
5.2 Late filing of missing drawings or missing parts of the 
description – without invitation 
Applicants may also file missing parts of the description or missing 
drawings on their own initiative (without being invited to do so by the EPO) 
within two months of the original filing date. If the applicant does not do so 
within this period, all references to the missing parts are deemed deleted. If 
the applicant is invited by the EPO to file the missing parts, the period 
under Rule 56(1) takes precedence (see A-II, 5.1). 
If, within two months of the original filing date, applicants notice that parts of 
the description or drawings are missing in the application as originally filed, 
they should, on their own initiative, file the missing parts or missing 
drawings as soon as possible under Rule 56(2) because, in the absence of 
a communication from the EPO sent under Rule 56(1) and 56a(1), the 
possibility for applicants to file any missing or correct parts ends two 
months after the original filing date. 
Further processing is ruled out for the time limits referred to in Rule 56 
(Rule 135(2)). 
5.3 The filing date changes 
If the applicant files missing parts of the description or missing drawings in 
accordance with the procedure specified in A-II, 5.1 or 5.2, then the filing 
date changes to the date on which the missing parts are received at the 
EPO. The applicant is informed of the new filing date. This is subject to the 
exception explained in A-II, 5.4. 
A "drawing" means a single numbered figure. Only whole figures are 
accepted according to Rule 56, even where only a part of the original figure 
was missing. 
5.4 Missing parts of the description or missing drawings based on 
the priority application, no change in filing date 
If the applicant files missing parts of the description or missing drawings 
after the filing date in accordance with the procedure specified in A-II, 5.1 or 
Art. 90(1) 
Rule 56(1) 
Rule 56(4)(a) 
Rule 56a(1) 
Rule 56(2) 
Rule 56(4)(a) 
Rule 135(2) 
Rule 56(2) 
Rule 56(3) 
Part A – Chapter II-12 

 
5.2, the filing date does not change, provided that all of the following criteria 
are satisfied: 
(i) 
the missing parts are filed within the applicable time limit* 
(ii) 
the application claims priority on the date on which the requirements 
laid down in Rule 40(1) were fulfilled (see A-II, 4.1 and A-II, 5.4.1) 
(iii) 
the applicant requests that the late-filed missing parts be based on 
the claimed priority in order to avoid a change in the filing date 
(see A-II, 5.4.1), and does so within the applicable time limit* 
(iv) 
the late-filed missing parts of the description or missing drawings are 
completely contained in the priority application (see A-II, 5.4.2) 
(v) 
the applicant files a copy of the priority application within the 
applicable time limit* unless such a copy is already available to the 
EPO under Rule 53(2) (see A-II, 5.4.3) 
(vi) 
where the priority application is not in an official EPO language, the 
applicant files a translation into one such language within the 
applicable time limit* unless such a translation is already available to 
the EPO under Rule 53(3) (see A-II, 5.4.4) 
(vii) 
the applicant indicates where in the priority application and, if 
applicable, where in its translation, the late-filed missing parts of the 
description or missing drawings are completely contained, and does 
so within the applicable time limit* (see A-II, 5.4.2). 
*For the applicable time limit, see whichever of A-II, 5.1 or 5.2 applies. 
Where the conditions for including the missing parts of the description or 
missing drawings under Rule 56(3) are fulfilled, the filing date remains 
unchanged. The EPO will inform the applicant of this in accordance with 
Rule 56(3). 
Where criterion (i) is not satisfied, the late filing of missing parts is deemed 
not to have occurred and all references to those parts in the application are 
deemed deleted under Rule 56(4)(a) (see A-II, 5.1 and 5.2). In this case the 
filing date does not change but nor are the late-filed missing parts 
introduced into the application. 
If the request according to Rule 56(3) does not comply with one or more of 
the above requirements (ii)-(iv), then according to Rule 56(2) the filing date 
changes to the date on which the EPO receives the late-filed missing parts 
of the application. The EPO will inform the applicant of this in accordance 
with Rule 56(2). 
If the request according to Rule 56(3) does not comply with one or more of 
the above requirements (v)-(vii), then according to Rule 56(5) the filing date 
changes to the date on which the EPO receives the late-filed missing parts 
Rule 56(3)(a) 
Rule 56(3)(b) 
Rule 56(3)(c) 
Rule 56(2) 
Rule 56(5) 
 

Part A – Chapter II-13 
of the application. The EPO will inform the applicant of this in accordance 
with Rule 56(5). 
5.4.1 Late-filed missing parts when priority is claimed 
In the case of a request under Rule 56(3), the EPO checks that the 
requirements for the priority claim are met (see A-III, 6). 
Where the applicant files a request under Rule 56(3) (see A-II, 5.4), the 
priority claim in question must have been in existence no later than on the 
date on which the requirements laid down in Rule 40(1) were first fulfilled 
(see A-II, 4.1). 
5.4.2 The missing parts of the description or missing drawings are 
completely contained in the priority application 
In cases where no translation of the priority application is required and both 
the European patent application and the priority application are in the same 
official EPO language, the requirement that the late-filed parts of the 
application be "completely contained" in the priority application is met only if 
the parts of the priority application identified by the applicant according to 
Rule 56(3)(c) contain the same drawings with the same annotations or, for 
late-filed parts of the description, contain the same text. 
If a translation of the priority application is required, then the requirement 
that the late-filed parts of the application be "completely contained" in the 
priority application is met only if the parts of the translation identified by the 
applicant according to Rule 56(3)(c) contain the same drawings with the 
same annotations or, for late-filed parts of the description, contain the same 
text. 
In addition to the requirement that the missing drawings or the missing 
parts of the description be identical to the corresponding drawings or parts 
of the priority application, they must also be inserted in the description in a 
manner that does not result in additional technical content. Drawings of low 
visual quality are not considered missing within the meaning of Rule 56 and 
can, therefore, not be remedied under this provision (see J 12/14). 
However, it may be possible to remedy drawings of low visual quality under 
Rule 56a (see A-II, 6). 
Final assessment of the "completely contained" requirement falls under the 
responsibility of the examining division (see C-III, 1). 
5.4.3 Copy of the priority application 
The copy of the priority application that is required for the request according 
to Rule 56(3) does not need to be certified. However, if the applicants do 
provide a certified copy for their request according to Rule 56(3), they will 
not need to provide it again for their priority claim according to Rule 53(1). 
Where a copy of the priority document is already available to the EPO 
under Rule 53(2) in accordance with the conditions laid down by the 
President, the applicant does not need to file it. See also A-III, 6.7. 
Rule 40(1) 
Rule 56a 
Part A – Chapter II-14 

 
5.4.4 Translation of the priority application 
Where a translation of the priority application is already available to the 
EPO under Rule 53(2), the applicant does not need to file it. 
In cases where the priority application is in an official EPO language and 
the European patent application is in a different official EPO language, the 
applicant is not required to file a translation of the priority application 
according to Rule 56(3)(b). However, since the language of the priority 
application differs from that of the European patent application, the 
requirement that the newly introduced drawings (if they contain 
annotations) or parts of the description be "completely contained" in the 
priority application (Rule 56(3)) is not met. 
This can be overcome by the applicant's supplying within the applicable 
time limit (see whichever of A-II, 5.1 or 5.2 applies), either: 
(i) 
a translation from the official language of the priority application into 
the official language of the European patent application of those 
parts of the priority application identified by the applicant as 
completely containing the missing parts of the description or missing 
drawings (Rule 56(3)(c)) or 
(ii) 
a declaration indicating that the late-filed missing parts of the 
description or missing drawings are an exact translation of the parts 
of the priority application identified by the applicant according to 
Rule 56(3)(c). 
The entire priority application does not need to be translated, since this 
translation is required to satisfy the "completely contained" requirement of 
Rule 56(3), not the translation requirement of Rule 56(3)(b). 
5.5 Withdrawal of late-filed missing drawings or missing parts of the 
description 
Where applicants file missing parts of the description or missing drawings 
and make no request to base these late-filed parts on a claimed priority, 
they are informed of the new filing date in a communication from the EPO 
(see A-II, 5.3). Within one month of this communication, the applicants may 
withdraw the late-filed parts of the application and if they do so, the redating 
of the application is deemed not to have taken place and all references to 
the missing parts of the description or missing drawings are deemed 
deleted. The EPO will inform the applicants of this. 
Where applicants file missing parts of the description or missing drawings 
and request that these late-filed parts be based on a claimed priority, but 
the requirements of Rule 56(3) are not met within the applicable time limit, 
the filing date changes to the date on which the late-filed parts of the 
application are received at the EPO (Rule 56(2) or (5)). The applicants are 
informed of the new filing date in a communication from the EPO. Within 
one month of this communication, they may withdraw the late-filed parts of 
the application (Rule 56(6)); if they do so, the redating of the application is 
deemed not to have taken place, any filing of missing parts of the 
description or missing drawings is deemed not to have occurred and all 
Rule 56(2) and (4) 
Rule 56(2), (4) and (5) 
 

Part A – Chapter II-15 
references to the missing parts of the description or missing drawings are 
deemed deleted (Rule 56(4)). The EPO will inform the applicants of this. 
Where a reference to a missing figure, e.g. "see Fig. 4", is deemed deleted, 
then reference signs cited in it are also deemed deleted, although any 
technical information in the reference that is still technically meaningful 
without the reference may be retained: e.g. "see Fig. 4, a distillation 
column (1), provided with a condenser (2)" becomes "a distillation column 
provided with a condenser". The publication of the application (see 
A-VI, 1.3) in such a case will contain the application documents as 
originally filed, without the references deleted. 
If the late-filed missing parts of the application do not satisfy the physical 
requirements of Rule 49(2) in conjunction with the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113), the EPO will 
not invite the applicant to correct this deficiency according to Rule 58 until 
the one-month period for withdrawing them has expired without the 
applicant having withdrawn them (see A-III, 3.2.2). 
5.6 Additional fee for pages 
For the calculation of the additional fee for pages in excess of 35 ("page 
fee"), see A-III, 13.2. 
6. Correction of erroneously filed application documents or parts 
6.1 Correction of erroneously filed application documents or parts – 
on invitation 
The application is examined on filing to check that it is entitled to a filing 
date. If, during this check, the EPO establishes that the description, claims 
or drawings (or parts of them) appear to have been erroneously filed, it will 
invite the applicant to file the correct documents within a time limit of two 
months of a communication under Rules 56(1) and 56a(1) (see A-II, 5). 
During this time limit, the applicant may proceed under Rule 56a or 
Rule 56. If the applicant does not reply to this invitation in time, any filing of 
the correct application documents or parts will be deemed not to have 
occurred and the erroneously filed documents or parts will remain in the 
application as filed (Rule 56a(5)). It should be noted that the applicant may 
not invoke the omission of the communication under Rules 56(1) and 
56a(1) (see the notice from the EPO dated 23 June 2022, OJ EPO 2022, 
A71). 
6.2 Correction of erroneously filed application documents or parts – 
without invitation 
Applicants may also file correct (parts of) the description, claims or 
drawings on their own initiative (without being invited to do so by the EPO) 
within two months of the original filing date. If the applicant is invited by the 
EPO to file correct application documents or parts, the period under 
Rule 56a(1) takes precedence (see A-II, 6.1). 
If, within two months of the original filing date, applicants notice that they 
filed erroneous application documents or parts, they should, on their own 
initiative, file the correct ones as soon as possible under Rule 56a(3) 
Rule 56a(1) 
Rule 56a(5) 
Rule 56a(3) 
Part A – Chapter II-16 

 
because, in the absence of an EPO communication sent under Rules 56 
and 56a(1), the possibility for applicants to file any missing or correct parts 
ends two months after the original filing date. 
Whether documents were erroneously filed depends only on the applicants' 
statement as to their intention. No further evidence is required by the EPO. 
Further processing is ruled out for the time limits under Rule 56a(1) and (3) 
to (7) (Rule 135(2)). 
6.3 The filing date changes 
If, after the filing date, the applicant corrects the application documents (or 
parts) in accordance with the procedures explained in A-II, 6.1 or A-II, 6.2, 
then the erroneously filed documents will be deemed not to have been filed 
and the correct documents will be added to the application. The filing date 
changes to the date on which the EPO receives the correct parts. The 
applicant is informed of the new filing date under Rule 56a(3). This is 
subject to the exception explained in A-II, 6.4. 
Erroneously filed application documents remain in the file, even if they are 
considered not part of the application as filed. As such, following publication 
of the application, the erroneous application documents or parts are open 
to file inspection (see A-XI, 2.1 and A-XI, 2.3). 
6.4 Correct application documents based on priority application, no 
change in the filing date 
If, after the filing date, the applicant corrects the application documents (or 
parts) in accordance with the procedures explained in A-II, 6.1 or A-II, 6.2, 
then the filing date does not change, provided that all of the following 
criteria are satisfied: 
(i) 
the correct application documents (or parts) are filed within the 
applicable time limit* 
(ii) 
the application claims priority on the date on which the requirements 
of Rule 40(1) were fulfilled (see A-II, 4.1 and A-II, 6.4.1) 
(iii) 
the applicant requests that the correct application documents be 
based on the claimed priority (see A-II, 6.4.1) to avoid a change in 
the filing date, and does so within the applicable time limit* 
(iv) 
the correct application documents are completely contained in the 
priority application (see A-II, 6.4.1) 
(v) 
the applicant files a copy of the priority application within the 
applicable time limit* unless such a copy is already available to the 
EPO under Rule 53(2) (see A-II, 6.4.2) 
(vi) 
where the priority application is not in an official EPO language, the 
applicant files a translation into one such language within the 
applicable time limit* unless such a translation is already available to 
the EPO under Rule 53(3) (see A-II, 6.4.3) 
Rule 135(2) 
Rule 56a(4) 
 

Part A – Chapter II-17 
(vii) 
the applicant indicates where in the priority application and, if 
applicable, where in its translation, the correct application documents 
are completely contained, and does so within the applicable time 
limit* (see A-II, 6.4.2). 
*For the applicable time limit, see whichever of A-II, 6.1 or A-II, 6.2 applies. 
Where the conditions for including the correct application documents or 
parts under Rule 56a(4) are fulfilled, the date of filing remains unchanged. 
The correct application documents or parts are included in the application 
and the erroneously filed ones remain in the application as filed. The EPO 
informs the applicants of this in a communication under Rule 56a(4). The 
erroneously filed documents may only be removed by amending the 
application during the grant proceedings and subject to Art. 123(2). 
Where criterion (i) is not satisfied, any filing of the correct application 
documents or parts is deemed not to have occurred. In this case, the filing 
date does not change and the erroneously filed application documents or 
parts remain in the application. The EPO will inform the applicant of this in 
accordance with Rule 56a(5). 
If the request according to Rule 56a(4) does not comply with one or more of 
criteria (ii)-(iv) above, then the date of filing will change to the date on which 
the EPO received the correct application documents or parts. They will be 
included in the application and the erroneously filed documents or parts will 
be deemed not to have been filed. The EPO will inform the applicant of this 
in accordance with Rule 56a(3). 
If the request according to Rule 56a(4) does not comply with one or more of 
criteria (v)-(vii) above, then the filing date will change to the date on which 
the EPO received the correct application documents or parts and the 
erroneously filed ones will be deemed not to have been filed. The EPO will 
inform the applicant of this in accordance with Rule 56a(6). 
6.4.1 Later-filed correct application documents or parts when 
priority is claimed 
In the case of a request under Rule 56a(4), the EPO will check that the 
requirements for the priority claim are met (see A-III, 6). 
Where the applicant files a request under Rule 56a(4) (see A-II, 6.4), the 
priority claim in question must have been in existence on the date on which 
the requirements laid down in Rule 40(1) were fulfilled (see A-II, 4.1). 
The requirement that the correct application documents or parts be 
completely contained in the priority application is the same as for missing 
parts of the description or missing drawings filed under Rule 56(3) 
(see A-II, 5.4.2). 
Final assessment of the "completely contained" requirement falls under the 
responsibility of the examining division (see C-III, 1). 
Rule 56a(5)(a) 
Rule 56a(3) 
Rule 56a(6) 
Rule 56a(4) 
Part A – Chapter II-18 

 
6.4.2 Copy of the priority application 
The same requirements apply as for missing parts of the description or 
missing drawings filed under Rule 56(3) (see A-II, 5.4.3). 
6.4.3 Translation of the priority application 
The same requirements apply as for missing parts of the description or 
missing drawings filed under Rule 56(3) (see A-II, 5.4.4). 
6.5 Withdrawal of correct application documents or parts 
Where applicants are informed about the new filing date, they may, within 
one month of the communication under Rule 56a(3) or (6) as applicable 
(see A-II, 6.3 and A-II, 6.4), withdraw the correct application documents or 
parts in order to maintain the initial date of filing. In this case, redating of 
the application and any filing of the correct documents or parts will be 
deemed not to have occurred. The erroneously filed documents or parts will 
be restored to the application as filed. The EPO will inform the applicants of 
this in accordance with Rule 56a(7). 
6.6 Same-day corrections 
If applicants become aware that they filed incorrect application documents 
or parts and wish to file correct ones on or before the date the requirements 
of Rule 40(1) are fulfilled (see A-II, 4.1), they can do so without needing to 
file a new application and pay the corresponding fees (Rule 56a(2)). The 
correct application documents or parts are included in the application and 
the erroneously filed ones are deemed not to have been filed. The EPO will 
inform the applicants of this in accordance with Rule 56a(2). 
6.7 Correct application documents or parts filed after the search has 
started 
If applicants file correct application documents or parts after the EPO has 
already begun to draw up the search report, the EPO will invite them to pay 
a further search fee under Rule 56a(8) within a time limit of one month. If 
the fee is paid in time, the search will be completed on the basis of the filing 
date and the application documents established under the procedures 
described in A-II, 6.3, 6.4 or 6.5. If the fee is not paid in time, the application 
will be deemed withdrawn (Rule 112(1)). Further processing is available 
(Rule 135(2)). Payment of the further search fee is excluded from automatic 
debiting (see Annex A.1 to the ADA, point 3(l)). 
6.8 Additional fee for pages 
For the calculation of the additional fee for pages in excess of 35 ("page 
fee"), see A-III, 13.2. 
6.9 Claims fee 
For the calculation of the claims fee, see A-III, 9. 
Rule 56a(7) 
Rule 56a(2) 
Rule 56a(8) 
Rule 112(1) 
Rule 135(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-1 
Chapter III – Examination of formal 
requirements 
1. General 
1.1 Formal requirements 
The formal requirements that an application has to meet are examined by 
the Receiving Section and relate to: 
(i) 
representation 
(ii) 
signature 
(iii) 
physical requirements of the application 
(iv) 
abstract 
(v) 
request for grant 
(vi) 
claim to priority 
(vii) 
designation of inventor 
(viii) translations, where required 
(ix) 
the presence of at least one claim 
(x) 
filing and search fees. 
1.2 Further checks 
In addition, the Receiving Section has to: 
(i) 
carry out a preliminary check of the description and claims to ensure 
that the title of the invention, which will appear in the published 
application, generally meets the requirements of Rule 41(2)(b) 
(ii) 
check whether any claims fees due have been paid (see also A-III, 9) 
(iii) 
check whether the certificate of exhibition under Rule 25 has been 
filed where the invention has been displayed under Art. 55(1)(b) 
(see also A-IV, 3) 
(iv) 
check whether in the case of European patent applications relating to 
biological material the information under Rule 31(1)(c) and (d) is 
complete (see also A-IV, 4) 
(v) 
check whether in the case of an application with nucleotide and/or 
amino acid sequences a prescribed sequence listing has also been 
filed (see also A-IV, 5 as well as the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A96, and the notice 
from the EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A97). 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 57 
Rule 41(2)(b) 
Rule 45(1) and (2) 
Art. 55(1)(b) 
Rule 25 
Rule 31 
Rule 30 
Part A – Chapter III-2 

 
The requirements listed above and the procedure to be followed when they 
are not met are considered in the following sections. 
2. 
Representation 
2.1 Requirements 
The formalities officer must ensure that the requirements with regard to 
representation as set out in A-VIII, 1 are met. The main points are: 
(i) 
applicants who have neither a residence nor principal place of 
business in a contracting state must be represented by an authorised 
professional representative or by an authorised legal practitioner 
fulfilling the requirements of Art. 134(8) 
(ii) 
where an applicant having residence or principal place of business in 
a contracting state is represented by an employee, the employee is 
authorised  
(iii) 
the authorisation, if any is required (see A-VIII, 1.5 and the decision 
of the President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, Special edition 
No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, L.1), must be duly signed (see A-VIII, 3.2 and 
A-VIII, 3.4) and filed in due time. 
2.2 Non-compliance 
The effect of non-compliance with the provisions concerning representation 
and the action to be taken by the formalities officer in dealing with any 
deficiency are considered in A-III, 16. 
3. 
Physical requirements 
3.1 General remarks 
Every application that is subject to formal examination is examined for 
compliance 
with 
the 
requirements 
as 
to 
form 
set 
out 
below. 
Non-compliance with the requirements is considered in A-III, 16. 
3.2 Documents making up the application, replacement documents, 
translations 
The Receiving Section must ensure that the documents making up the 
application, i.e. request, description, claims, drawings and abstract, meet 
the requirements of Rule 49(2) in conjunction with Art. 4(2) of the decision 
of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
25 November 2022 
(OJ EPO 2022, A113) to the extent necessary for satisfactory reproduction 
and reasonably uniform publication of the application under Rule 68(1). 
This equally applies to any supplementary document filed as an appendix 
to the description. When evaluating the quality of the application documents 
and their suitability for electronic and direct reproduction, the Receiving 
Section's objective must be to ascertain the discernibility of all details 
originally disclosed in the documents received on the date of filing. The 
Receiving Section should not, however, draw the applicant's attention to 
any deficiencies in the content of the application, namely those listed in 
Art. 1(2)(i) and (j) and Art. 2(8), fourth sentence, of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (see also the notice from 
Art. 133(2) 
Art. 133(3) 
Rule 152 
Art. 90(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-3 
the EPO dated 25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A114, point 8, and 
A-III, 16.1). 
In the case of requirements that may necessitate some technical 
knowledge, such as those of Art. 1(2)(f) and (2)(h) of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022, the Receiving Section 
should, if in doubt, consult and take the advice of the search division. It 
should also consider taking action when the search division identifies a 
deficiency previously overlooked. It should be noted that flow sheets and 
diagrams are to be considered as drawings (Art. 1(3) of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022). 
If the formal requirements of Rule 49(2) are not met, the applicant is invited 
to remedy this deficiency within a non-extendable two-month period 
(Rule 58 and Rule 50(1)). If it is not remedied in time, the application is 
refused (Art. 90(5)). 
Once the examining division assumes responsibility for the application, it 
also becomes responsible for formal matters. It should pay particular 
attention to the more technical requirements, in particular those laid down 
in Art. 1(2)(i) and (j), Art. 2(8), fourth sentence, and Art. 2(9) and (10) of the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (see also 
the notice from the EPO dated 25 November 2022, point 8). 
Replacement documents, including the amendment of granted patents 
(Rule 86), and translations in an official language of documents filed under 
the provisions of Art. 14(2) or (4) are subject to the same requirements as 
the documents making up the application. They must therefore be typed or 
printed. Submissions containing handwritten amendments to application or 
patent specification documents are formally deficient and need to be 
corrected (see OJ EPO 2013, 603; however, see also E-III, 8.7 and 
OJ EPO 2016, A22, as well as H-III, 2.2). 
In examination proceedings the invitation to correct formal deficiencies is 
sent by the formalities officer on behalf of the examining division (see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, 
OJ EPO 2014, A6). 
With regard to sequence listings, see A-IV, 5. 
The particular requirements for drawings are dealt with in A-IX. 
3.2.1 Physical requirements of applications filed by reference to a 
previously filed application 
If the application is filed by reference to a previously filed application under 
Rule 40(1)(c) (see A-II, 4.1.3.1), and if no translation is required, the 
certified copy of the previously filed application required under Rule 40(3) 
must satisfy the physical requirements. If the previously filed application is 
not in an official EPO language, only the translation under Rule 40(3) must 
satisfy the physical requirements (Rule 49(2)), provided that the authenticity 
of the contents of the original is not impugned. 
Rule 10 
Art. 94(1) 
Rule 1 
Rule 49(2) 
Rule 50(1) and 
(2) 
Rule 86 
Part A – Chapter III-4 

 
3.2.2 Physical requirements of late-filed application documents or 
correct application documents or parts 
Where claims are filed after the filing date (see A-III, 15) or where missing 
parts of the description, missing drawings or correct application documents 
or parts are inserted after the filing date (see A-II, 5 and A-II, 6), all of these 
late-filed 
application 
documents 
must 
also 
satisfy 
the 
physical 
requirements. Consequently, the EPO will carry out two separate checks, 
first on the physical requirements of the original application documents, and 
second on any late-filed application documents. Any deficiencies will be 
communicated only when the complete application documents are on file. 
If the late filing of missing parts of the description, missing drawings or 
correct application documents or parts results in a change of the filing date, 
the applicant can withdraw the late-filed parts of the description or drawings 
up to one month after being notified of the change in filing date 
(Rule 56(6)). Similarly, they can withdraw correct application documents or 
parts filed under Rule 56a within the same period (Rule 56a(7)). 
Consequently, if the late-filed missing parts of the description, missing 
drawings or correct application documents or parts: 
(i) 
contain deficiencies with regard to the physical requirements and 
(ii) 
result in a change of the filing date, 
the EPO will wait until the one-month period for their withdrawal has 
expired and will then send a communication according to Rule 58 in respect 
of these deficiencies, if the applicant has not withdrawn them in time. 
3.3 Other documents 
All documents other than those making up the application must be 
typewritten or printed with a left margin of about 2.5 cm on each page 
(Art. 3 
of 
the 
decision 
of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113). 
4. 
Request for grant 
4.1 General remarks 
The request for grant must be made on the appropriate EPO form 
(EPO Form 1001), even though the request (the indication that a patent is 
sought, referred to in A-II, 4.1(i)) need initially be in no particular form. The 
latest version of EPO Form 1001 can be accessed in EPO Online Filing 
and Online Filing 2.0 or downloaded from the EPO website (epo.org) 
(see A-II, 1.1.1). 
For filing with EPO Online Filing, applicants should always use the latest 
version of the software (see A-II, 1.1.1(i)) and, for paper filings and filings 
made with the EPO web-form filing service and the EPO Contingency 
Upload Service, the latest version of the form. 
4.2 Examination of the request for grant form 
The Receiving Section examines the request form to ensure that it contains 
the information listed in Rule 41(2), including the integral petition for grant 
Rule 50(2) 
Rule 41(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-5 
(Rule 41(2)(a)). The applicant must be allowed to correct deficiencies in the 
request to the extent indicated in A-III, 16. 
4.2.1 Information on the applicant 
As specified in Rule 41(2)(c), the request must contain the name, address 
and nationality of the applicant and the state in which that party's residence 
or principal place of business is located. Where the application is filed by 
more than one applicant, the requirement must be satisfied for each 
applicant. At this stage in the proceedings, the formalities officer will 
consider the person named as applicant's entitlement to apply for a patent 
(A-II, 2). 
Applicants (whether natural or legal persons) whose residence or principal 
place of business is in an EPC contracting state and who act without a 
professional representative can use an address for correspondence other 
than their residence. It must be the applicant's own address and be in an 
EPC contracting state. For the address to be used in proceedings before 
the EPO applicants must explicitly inform the EPO that it is to be used for 
correspondence, preferably by entering it in the box marked "Address for 
correspondence" on EPO Form 1001 (see the notice from the EPO dated 
4 September 2014, OJ EPO 2014, A99). Correspondence cannot be sent 
to a different (natural or legal) person, since that requires a valid form of 
representation under Art. 133 and 134. 
4.2.2 Signature 
The request must be signed by the applicant or the appointed 
representative. If there is more than one applicant, each applicant or their 
appointed representative must sign the request. For further details as to the 
signature of the request, see A-VIII, 3.2 to 3.4. 
4.2.3 Further requirements laid down by Rule 41(2) 
The provisions of Rule 41(2)(b), (e), (f) and (g), dealing respectively with 
the title of the invention, divisional applications, Art. 61 applications and 
claim to priority, are considered in subsequent sections of this chapter and 
in A-IV. 
5. Designation of inventor 
5.1 General remarks 
Every application must designate the inventor, who must be a natural 
person (J 8/20). The designation is incorporated in EPO Online Filing and 
Online Filing 2.0 (see A-II, 1.1.1). When filing on paper or in the EPO web-
form filing service or the EPO Contingency Upload Service, the designation 
is filed on a separate document where the applicant is not the inventor or 
the sole inventor. Where that is not the case, the designation must be 
effected on the request for grant form (EPO Form 1001) by selecting the 
appropriate box in section 22. Where the designation is effected on a 
separate document, a trilingual form – EPO Form 1002 – available on the 
EPO website should preferably be used. 
Rule 41(2)(h) 
Art. 81 
Rule 19 
Rule 41(2)(j) 
Part A – Chapter III-6 

 
5.2 Waiver of right to be mentioned as inventor 
Inventors designated by the applicant may send the EPO a written waiver 
of their right to be mentioned as inventor in the published European patent 
application and the European patent specification. If it is received in time, 
their name is not mentioned in the published European patent application, 
the European patent specification, the European Patent Register 
(Rule 143(1)(g)) and, consequently, the European Patent Bulletin. 
Moreover, in accordance with Rule 144(c), the designation of the inventor 
as well as the waiver is then excluded from file inspection under Art. 128(4). 
If the waiver is received after the publication of the European patent 
application, the mention of the inventor will be removed in the European 
Patent Register. 
5.3 Designation filed in a separate document 
Where filed in a separate document, the designation must contain the 
inventor's family name, given names and country and place of residence. 
The place of residence is the city or municipality, i.e. not the province or 
region, where the inventor permanently resides and should preferably 
include the postal code (see the notice from the EPO dated 
22 February 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A12). The country and place of residence 
may also be that of the inventor's employer (e.g. a company). The 
designation must contain the statement, referred to in Art. 81, indicating the 
origin of the right to the patent and the signature of the applicant or the 
appointed representative. 
In the case of assignment, the words "by agreement dated ..." suffice. For 
inventions by employees, it is sufficient to mention that the inventor(s) 
is/are employee(s) of the applicant(s) and for cases of succession that the 
applicant(s) is/are heir(s) of the inventor(s). 
The designation of inventor must be signed by the applicant or the 
appointed representative. With regard to the signature, the provisions set 
out in A-VIII, 3.2 to A-VIII, 3.4, apply. 
The EPO does not verify the accuracy of the information given in the 
designation of the inventor but checks whether the designated inventor is a 
natural person (J 8/20). 
If the designation of inventor is filed subsequently, the requirements set out 
in A-VIII, 3.1 apply. 
5.4 Deficiencies 
Where a designation is not filed or cannot be considered validly filed due to 
a deficiency (e.g. inventor's name / country / place of residence / applicant's 
signature is missing), the applicant is informed that the European patent 
application will be refused if the deficiency is not remedied within the period 
prescribed under Rule 60(1), i.e. within 16 months of the filing date or, if 
priority is claimed, of the priority date. This time limit is deemed met if the 
information is communicated before completion of the technical 
preparations for publication (see A-VI, 1.2). For divisional applications, see 
A-IV, 1.5. Where the applicant has requested early publication and, 
accordingly, technical preparations for publication are completed before 
Rule 20(1) 
Rule 143(1)(g) 
Rule 144(c) 
Art. 129(a) 
Rule 19(1) 
Rule 19(2) 
Art. 90(3) to (5) 
Art. 93(1) 
Rule 60(1) 
Art. 121 
 

Part A – Chapter III-7 
expiry of the 16-month time limit, the applicant can still file the designation 
within that time limit (see J 1/10). If the deficiency is not remedied in time, 
the application is refused and the applicant is notified accordingly. Further 
processing is possible according to Art. 121 and Rule 135 (see E-VIII, 2). 
5.5 Incorrect designation 
An incorrect designation may be rectified, provided that a request is 
received together with the consent of the wrongly designated person and 
that of the patent's applicant or proprietor where the request is not filed by 
that party. If a further inventor is to be designated, the consent of the 
inventor(s) previously designated is not necessary (see J 8/82). The 
provisions of A-III, 5.3 apply to the corrected designation mutatis mutandis. 
Rectification may also be requested after the proceedings before the EPO 
are terminated. 
Where an incorrect designation has been rectified and where the incorrect 
designation was recorded in the European Patent Register or published in 
the European Patent Bulletin, its rectification or cancellation will also be 
recorded or published there. Rectification of the designation of an inventor 
falls under the responsibility of the Legal Division (see the decisions of the 
President of the EPO dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 600 and 
601). 
6. Claim to priority (see also F-VI) 
6.1 General remarks 
A European patent applicant is entitled to – and may claim – the priority of 
an earlier first application where: 
(i) 
the previous application was filed in or for a state or WTO member 
recognised as giving rise to a priority right in accordance with the 
provisions of the EPC (see also A-III, 6.2) 
(ii) 
the European patent applicant was the applicant who made the 
previous application or is their successor in title 
(iii) 
the European patent application is made during a period of twelve 
months from the previous application's filing date (see, however, 
A-III, 6.6) and 
(iv) 
the European patent application concerns the same invention as the 
invention disclosed in the previous application (see also A-III, 6.4 and 
F-VI, 1), which must be the "first application" (see F-VI, 1.4 and 
1.4.1). 
As concerns (i), the previous application may be an application for a patent, 
the registration of a utility model or a utility certificate. However, a priority 
right based on the deposit of an industrial design is not recognised 
(see J 15/80). 
So long as the contents of the previous application were sufficient to 
establish a filing date, that date can be used to determine a priority date, 
Rule 21(1) 
Rule 21(2) 
Art. 87(1), (2) 
and (5) 
Art. 87(3) 
Part A – Chapter III-8 

 
irrespective of the outcome (e.g. subsequent withdrawal or refusal) of the 
application. 
As concerns (ii), it is important to note that the transfer of the priority right is 
distinct from a possible transfer of the priority application and must be 
assessed under the EPC, regardless of any national laws. The EPC does 
not set out any formal requirements for the transfer of the priority right (see 
G 1/22 and G 2/22). Where the previous application was filed by joint 
applicants, all of them must be among the later European patent 
application's applicants or have transferred their rights in the priority 
application to the later European patent application's applicant (see 
T 844/18). Yet, absent any substantiated indication to the contrary, there is 
a strong rebuttable presumption under the EPC that an applicant or joint 
applicants claiming priority in accordance with Art. 88(1) and Rule 52 are 
also entitled to the claimed priority. The burden of proof is shifted, and the 
examining division, opponent or third party challenging an applicant's 
entitlement to priority has to prove that this entitlement is missing. 
Especially where an international application under the PCT is filed by joint 
applicants, including the priority applicant, but without naming the priority 
applicant as applicant for the European designation, the mere fact of the 
joint filing implies an agreement between the applicants allowing all of them 
to rely on the priority right unless substantial facts indicate otherwise (see 
G 1/22 and G 2/22). 
However, in the case of joint applicants filing the later European patent 
application, it is sufficient if one of the applicants is the previous 
application's applicant or their successor in title. There is no need for a 
special transfer of the priority right to the other applicant(s), since the later 
European patent application has been filed jointly. The same applies where 
the previous application itself was filed by joint applicants, provided that all 
of them, or their successor(s) in title, are among the later European patent 
application's joint applicants. 
As concerns (iii), the priority period starts on the day following the first 
application's filing date (Art. 4C(2) Paris Convention and Rule 131(2)). 
Accordingly, where a priority claim relates to an application filed on the 
same day as the European patent application, it will be disregarded (see, 
however, also A-III, 6.6). 
6.2 Applications giving rise to a right of priority 
Applications giving rise to a right of priority referred to in A-III, 6.1(i) are 
those filed at industrial property offices: 
(a) 
of or acting for states party to the Paris Convention for the Protection 
of Industrial Property 
(b) 
of or acting for any member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) 
or 
Art. 87(1) 
Art. 87(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-9 
(c) 
not subject to either the Paris Convention or the Agreement 
establishing the WTO, but where: 
(i) 
that authority recognises that a first filing made at the EPO 
gives rise to a right of priority under conditions and with effects 
equivalent to those laid down in the Paris Convention and 
(ii) 
the EPO President issues a communication indicating this. 
To date, no such communication referred to in (c)(ii) has been issued and 
so this does not as yet apply. Furthermore, the members of the WTO do 
not necessarily have to be states as such but may also be 
intergovernmental bodies or regions with special status such as the 
Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu. 
In view of the wording of Art. 87(1), which refers to filings "in or for" any 
state party to the Paris Convention or member of the WTO, priority may be 
claimed of an earlier first-filed national application, a previous European 
patent application, a previous application filed under another regional 
patent treaty or an international application filed under the PCT. This 
includes the US "provisional application for patent" (notice from the EPO 
President dated 26 January 1996, OJ EPO 1996, 81). A list of the countries 
party to the Paris Convention is available on WIPO's website and regularly 
published in the EPO Official Journal. Likewise, a list of the members of the 
WTO is regularly updated on the WTO website. 
6.3 Multiple priorities 
The applicant may claim more than one priority based on previous 
applications in the same or different states and/or WTO members. Where 
multiple priorities are claimed, time limits calculated from the priority date 
run from the earliest date of priority and, as a result, the European patent 
application must be made within twelve months of the earliest priority date 
(see, however, A-III, 6.6); this applies if earlier applications have been filed 
in any of the industrial property offices mentioned in A-III, 6.2. 
6.4 Examination of the priority document 
The Receiving Section is not required to examine the content of the priority 
document. However, where it is obvious, e.g. from the title of the document, 
that the document concerns subject-matter quite different from that of the 
application, the applicant should be informed that that the document filed 
might not be relevant. 
6.5 Declaration of priority 
An applicant wishing to claim priority must file a declaration of priority 
indicating: 
(i) 
the date of the previous application 
(ii) 
the state or WTO member in or for which it was filed  
(iii) 
its file number. 
Art. 87(5) 
Art. 88(2) 
Art. 88(1) 
Rule 52(1) 
Rule 41(2)(g) 
Art. 90(4) 
Part A – Chapter III-10 

 
The declaration of priority should preferably be made on filing the European 
patent application (Rule 52(2)). In such a case the declaration of priority, 
indicating at least the date on which and the country for which the earlier 
application was filed, should be included on the request for grant form 
(Rule 41(2)(g)). However, if a priority claim is added or corrected after the 
request for grant form has been filed (see A-III, 6.5.1 and 6.5.2), the 
applicant will not be invited by the EPO to file a corrected request for grant. 
The time limit for filing the certified copy of the priority document is the 
same as for making the priority claim (see A-III, 6.5.1 and 6.7). 
Consequently, where: 
(a) 
the applicant supplies the certified copy on time and 
(b) 
the date and file number are indicated on the certified copy 
the requirements of Rule 52(1) are met. 
6.5.1 Filing a new priority claim 
The declaration of priority should preferably be made on filing but can be 
made up to 16 months from the earliest priority date claimed. That is to say, 
items (i)-(iii) mentioned in A-III, 6.5 can be supplied up to 16 months after 
the earliest claimed priority date. Where the priority claim is inserted after 
the filing date and causes a change in the earliest priority date, this 
16-month period is calculated from that new earliest priority date in 
accordance with Art. 88(2). A priority claim inserted after the filing date 
cannot be used in support of a request made under Rule 56(3) or 56a(4) 
(see A-II, 5.4 and A-II, 6.4). 
The applicant cannot request further processing in respect of the time limit 
for introducing a new priority claim under Rule 52(2), since it is ruled out by 
Rule 135(2). 
6.5.2 Correcting an existing priority claim 
The applicant may correct the declaration of priority within 16 months of the 
earliest priority date. Where the correction causes a change in the earliest 
claimed priority date, this time limit is the earlier to expire of: 
(i) 
16 months from the earliest priority date as originally claimed or 
(ii) 
16 months from the earliest priority date as corrected. 
However, this time limit cannot expire earlier than four months after the 
date of filing. Thus, if the originally claimed priority date is incorrect and 
precedes the date of filing by more than twelve months, the applicants will 
always have at least four months to correct this date, i.e. the same period 
as if they had claimed the correct priority date (and for example got the file 
number wrong) and claimed a full twelve-month priority period. 
If the applicant files a request for correction later it may, exceptionally, be 
allowed if it is apparent from the published application that a mistake was 
made (see A-V, 3 and other sources mentioned there). 
Rule 52(2) 
Rule 52(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-11 
6.5.3 Deficiencies in the priority claim and loss of the priority right 
Four potential deficiencies exist with regard to the priority claim, namely: 
(i) 
failure to indicate a date of the previous application or to indicate the 
correct date 
(ii) 
failure to indicate a state or WTO member in or for which it was filed 
or to indicate the correct state or WTO member 
(iii) 
failure to supply a file number 
(iv) 
failure to indicate the correct file number. 
Deficiencies (i) and (ii) can only be corrected in accordance with the 
procedures and within the time limit indicated in A-III, 6.5.2. Failure to 
correct either of these deficiencies in time results in loss of the priority right 
in question according to Art. 90(5). Further processing does not apply to the 
time limit under Rule 52(3), since it is ruled out by Rule 135(2). 
However, where applicants have failed to indicate the file number of the 
previous application (deficiency (iii)), as required by Rule 52(1), before 
expiry of the 16-month time limit laid down in Rule 52(2), they are invited by 
the EPO to provide it within a two-month period under Rule 59. This period 
can be extended under Rule 132(2) (see E-IX, 2.3.5 for Euro-PCT 
applications), but further processing is ruled out by Rule 135(2). Failure to 
reply in time to this communication results in the loss of the priority right in 
question according to Art. 90(5). 
If the applicant has failed to indicate the correct file number of the priority 
application (deficiency (iv)), a request for correction under Rule 139 can be 
filed (see A-V, 3). 
6.6 Priority period 
Where a priority claim's date precedes the European patent application's 
filing date by more than twelve months, the applicant may be informed by 
the Receiving Section that their priority claim is considered invalid unless 
they: 
(i) 
indicate a corrected date lying within the twelve-month period 
preceding the filing date and do so within the time limit according to 
Rule 52(3) (see A-III, 6.5.2) or 
(ii) 
request re-establishment of rights in respect of the priority period and 
do so within two months of the expiry of the priority period, and this 
request is subsequently granted (see paragraph below). This only 
applies where the applicant also filed the European patent 
application within the same two-month period. 
Where priority is claimed from an application having the same filing date as 
the European patent application (see A-III, 6.1), the EPO will inform the 
applicant that priority cannot be claimed from this application unless the 
priority date can be corrected (see A-III, 6.5.2). 
Art. 90(4) and 
(5) 
Art. 90(4) and (5) 
Rule 59 
Art. 122 
Rule 133 
Rule 134 
Rule 136 
Part A – Chapter III-12 

 
Rules 133 and 134 apply to the priority period under Art. 87(1). If the date 
indicated for the previous application is subsequent to or the same as the 
filing date, the procedure set out in A-III, 6.5.2 also applies (with regard to 
the possibility of correcting clerical or similar errors, see A-V, 3). 
According to Art. 122 and Rule 136(1) re-establishment of rights in respect 
of the priority period (twelve months according to Art. 87(1)) is possible. 
The request for re-establishment must be filed within two months of expiry 
of the priority period (Rule 136(1)) and the omitted act, i.e. the 
establishment of a filing date for the European patent application, must also 
be completed in this period (Rule 136(2)). For more details on requesting 
re-establishment of rights, see E-VIII, 3. 
6.7 Copy of the previous application (priority document) 
A copy of the previous application from which priority is claimed (priority 
document) must be filed before the end of the 16th month after the priority 
date. Priority documents may be filed in paper form or electronically using 
EPO Online Filing or Online Filing 2.0, provided the latter are in an 
accepted document format, have been digitally signed by the issuing 
authority and the signature is accepted by the EPO. Such electronic priority 
documents are currently being issued by the patent offices of Austria, 
Brazil, Czech Republic, Greece, Italy, France, Poland, Portugal, Singapore 
and the USA, with further offices expected to follow. Priority documents 
may not be filed using the EPO web-form filing service or the EPO 
Contingency Upload Service (see the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A48) or by fax (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A18). Where 
multiple priorities are claimed, the above time limit runs from the earliest 
date of priority. 
The copy and the filing date of the previous application must be certified as 
correct by the authority with which the previous application was filed. 
Certification of the date may take the form of a separate certificate issued 
by that authority stating the filing date of the previous application 
(Rule 53(1), second sentence) or may be an integral part of the priority 
document itself. The certification of the copy's authenticity may also be a 
separate document or an integral part of the priority document. 
A copy of the previous application (priority document) can also be filed on 
physical media other than paper, e.g. CD-R disc, provided that: 
(a) 
the physical medium containing the priority document is prepared by 
the authority with which the previous application was filed and comes 
with the guarantee that its content cannot undetectably be altered 
subsequently 
(b) 
the content of the physical medium is certified by that authority as an 
exact copy of (parts of) the previous application and 
(c) 
the filing date of the previous application is also certified by that 
authority. 
Rule 53(1) 
Art. 88(2) 
Art. 90(4) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-13 
The certificate(s) may be filed separately on paper. The physical medium 
must be readable and free of computer viruses and other forms of 
malicious logic. 
At the request of the applicant, the EPO will include free of charge in the file 
of a European patent application a copy of the previous application from 
which priority is claimed retrieved via the WIPO Digital Access Service 
(DAS). DAS permits the automatic electronic exchange of priority 
documents between participating patent offices. Applicants may request the 
office of first filing (OFF) to make certified copies of previously filed patent 
applications available to DAS and then request offices of second filing 
(OSF) to retrieve the copies via DAS by indicating the DAS access code(s) 
corresponding to the previous application(s) (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 13 November 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A83, and 
the notice from the EPO dated 22 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A27). 
If a priority document cannot be retrieved via DAS or if the applicant has 
not requested retrieval via DAS, the EPO will include free of charge a copy 
of the previous application in the file of the European patent application, if 
the previous application is: 
(i) 
a European patent application 
(ii) 
an international application filed with the EPO as receiving Office 
under the PCT. 
No request is necessary for this. If the language of the previous application 
was not one of the official EPO languages, it may still be necessary to file 
the translation or declaration under Rule 53(3) (see A-III, 6.8). 
Where the applicant has already supplied a copy of the priority document in 
connection with a request to base late-filed parts of the description or 
drawings on the claimed priority under Rule 56 (see A-II, 5.4(v)) or to base 
correct application documents or parts on the claimed priority under 
Rule 56a (see A-II, 6.4(v)), there is no need to file it again. However, if the 
copy already provided was not certified as to its content and/or filing date, 
the applicant will need to provide the missing certification within the above 
time limit. 
If applicants fail to provide a certified copy of the priority document within 
the above-mentioned period (Rule 53(1)), the EPO will invite them to 
provide it within a two-month period under Rule 59. This period can be 
extended under Rule 132(2) (see E-IX, 2.3.5 for Euro-PCT applications), 
but further processing is ruled out by Rule 135(2). If the applicant fails to 
provide it within this period, the priority right in question is lost (Art. 90(5)). 
A copy of the previous application that cannot be included in the file will not 
be deemed duly filed under Rule 53(2). The EPO will inform applicants in 
good time and give them an opportunity to file the certified copy in 
accordance with Rule 53(1) (see the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 13 November 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A83, and the notice from the 
EPO dated 13 November 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A84). 
Rule 53(2) 
Art. 90(4) and 
(5) 
Rule 59 
Part A – Chapter III-14 

 
6.8 Translation of the previous application 
Where the previous application claimed as priority is not in an official EPO 
language and the validity of the priority claimed is relevant for assessing 
the patentability of the invention concerned, the EPO will invite the 
applicant for or proprietor of the European patent to file a translation into an 
official EPO language within a period specified. The duration of this period 
will vary depending on the stage of proceedings at which the invitation is 
sent (see the subsequent subsections). 
6.8.1 Invitation to file the translation before examination 
Where the search division notes that a translation of the previous 
application is required, the invitation to provide it according to Rule 53(3) 
may be sent at the same time as either item (i) or item (ii) below: 
(i) 
the communication according to Rule 69(1) and Rule 70a(1) (where 
the applicant does not file the request for examination before the 
search report is transmitted – see A-VI, 2.1). 
In this case, the time limit for providing the translation is the same as 
for filing the request for examination, i.e. six months from the date of 
mention of the publication of the European search report according to 
Rule 70(1). 
(ii) 
the communication according to Rule 70(2) (where the applicant files 
the request for examination before the (supplementary) European 
search report is transmitted – see A-VI, 2.3). 
In this case the time limit for providing the translation is the same as 
for filing the confirmation of the request for examination according to 
Rule 70(2): 
(a) 
for applications not filed via the PCT, this is six months from 
the date of mention of the publication of the European search 
report (see A-VI, 2.3). 
(b) 
for Euro-PCT applications subject to the preparation of a 
supplementary European search report (see B-II, 4.3.2), this is 
six months from the notification of the communication 
according to Rule 70(2) (see E-IX, 2.5.3). 
In practice, the invitation according to Rule 53(3) will be sent to the 
applicant in a separate communication and, in some cases, might not be 
dispatched on exactly the same date as the applicable communication 
indicated in (i) or (ii) above. However, this will not affect the expiry date of 
the period for providing the translation, since the relevant event used in its 
calculation (the mention of the publication of the European search report or 
the notification of the communication under Rule 70(2)) is not related to the 
notification of the invitation according to Rule 53(3). An exception applies 
where the communication under Rule 53(3) is notified less than two months 
before expiry of the resulting period; in that case the time limit for filing the 
translation will be considered extended until two months after the 
Art. 88(1) 
Rule 53(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-15 
notification of the invitation, without prejudice to its possible extension 
under Rule 132(2) (see E-VIII, 1.6). 
6.8.2 Invitation to file the translation in examination/opposition 
The period for providing the translation in either examination or opposition 
proceedings is four months. 
If not sent earlier (see A-III, 6.8.1), an invitation according to Rule 53(3) 
may be sent in examination proceedings either alone or as an annex to a 
communication according to Art. 94(3). When sent as an annex to a 
communication according to Art. 94(3), the time limit set for reply to that 
communication is the same as for providing the translation (i.e. four 
months), even where the issues raised in the communication are minor 
(see E-VIII, 1.2). 
For Euro-PCT applications where the EPO acted as the ISA or the 
Supplementary International Searching Authority (SISA, Rule 45bis PCT), 
an invitation according to Rule 53(3) may be sent by the examining division 
only after the period according to Rule 161(1) has expired (see E-IX, 3.2). 
Since the proprietor of a European patent might not have previously been 
invited to file a translation (in the examination procedure or earlier as 
indicated in A-III, 6.8.1) in cases where the validity of the claimed priority 
becomes relevant for assessing patentability in opposition proceedings, the 
EPO may make the above invitation during the opposition procedure. 
In examination and opposition proceedings, where the applicant or 
proprietor has been invited to provide the translation, no summons to oral 
proceedings will be sent until either the translation is provided or (in 
examination proceedings) the period for further processing in respect of the 
time limit according to Rule 53(3) has expired, whichever is the earlier. 
In practice, the search, examining or opposition division dealing with the 
patent application or patent will inform the formalities officer that a 
translation of the previous application is required and the formalities officer 
will then dispatch the above communication. 
6.8.3 Loss of rights and legal remedies 
If the applicant for or proprietor of the European patent does not provide the 
translation in time, the right of priority is lost and the applicant or proprietor 
is informed accordingly (see A-III, 6.11). This has the effect that the 
intermediate document(s) will become prior art under Art. 54(2) or 
Art. 54(3), as applicable, and therefore relevant for the assessment of 
patentability. There is no further invitation to the applicant or proprietor to 
file the translation. However, in examination proceedings, further 
processing is available in cases of failure to file the translation in time 
(see E-VIII, 2). Where appropriate, the applicant can also request a 
decision under Rule 112(2) (see E-VIII, 1.9.3). 
Where translations of more than one previous application are requested 
and not provided in time, one further processing fee is due according to 
Rule 135(1) and Art. 2(1), item 12, RFees for each of these priorities. This 
Rule 132(2) 
Part A – Chapter III-16 

 
applies even where the translations were requested in a single Rule 53(3) 
invitation. 
In the event of failure to file the translation in time in opposition 
proceedings, the proprietor can request re-establishment of rights 
according to Art. 122 and Rule 136 (see E-VIII, 3). Further processing is not 
available to the patent proprietor in opposition proceedings. A decision 
according to Rule 112(2) may, however, be requested, if applicable 
(see E-VIII, 1.9.3). 
6.8.4 Translation of previous application already filed 
Where the applicant has already supplied a translation of the previous 
application in connection with a request to base late-filed parts of the 
description 
or 
drawings 
on 
the 
claimed 
priority 
under 
Rule 56 
(see A-II, 5.4(vi)) or to base correct application documents or parts on the 
claimed priority under Rule 56a (see A-II, 6.4(vi)), the applicant does not 
need to file it again. 
6.8.5 Voluntary filing of the translation of the previous application 
Applicants for or proprietors of the European patent can file a translation of 
the previous application on their own initiative at any time during 
examination or opposition proceedings before the EPO. 
6.8.6 Declaration replacing the translation 
Alternatively, a declaration that the European patent application is a 
complete translation of the previous application may be submitted within 
those same time limits (see also F-VI, 3.4 and D-VII, 2). The declaration 
may also be made by selecting the appropriate box on the request for grant 
form (EPO Form 1001). This declaration is only valid if the text of the 
European patent application as filed is an exact translation of the previous 
application of which priority is claimed, i.e. with nothing added or omitted. If 
the European patent application did not contain claims on the filing date 
(see A-II, 4.1), the applicant can file these later (see A-III, 15). In such 
cases, for the declaration to be valid, the description of the European 
patent application must be an exact translation of the description of the 
claimed priority, regardless of whether the latter contained claims on its 
filing date. However, where the European patent application contains 
claims on its filing date and the previous application did not or contained 
fewer claims on its filing date, the declaration is not valid. Furthermore, if 
the European patent application contains more or less text than is 
contained in the previous application as filed, such a declaration cannot be 
accepted. Where the declaration cannot be accepted for any of the above 
reasons, to comply with the requirement for filing a translation, a complete 
translation must be filed within the set time limit. A declaration's validity is 
not affected by the simple rearrangement of its various parts (i.e. the claims 
vs. the description) (e.g. if the claims are presented at the end of the 
application, whereas in the previous application they are at the beginning) 
or by the use of a different type of reference sign (e.g. Arabic rather than 
Roman numerals). However, a declaration is not acceptable if changes 
have been made within the parts of the application (e.g. different order of 
claims, added reference signs) or if sections of the application (e.g. listing 
 

Part A – Chapter III-17 
of components, section headings and words in the drawings) are not 
identical to those in the previous application. 
Where a European patent application claims multiple priorities, the 
declaration will only in exceptional cases be a translation of the full text of 
one of the previous applications. In such cases, it may be filed in respect of 
the identical previous application, while a complete translation of the other 
previous application(s) will have to be filed on request. 
6.9 Non-entitlement to right to priority 
A European patent application has no right to priority if: 
(i) 
the application was not filed within the twelve-month period referred 
to in A-III, 6.1(iii) and the applicant has neither: 
(a) 
corrected the priority date on time (see A-III, 6.5.2) such that 
the European patent application's filing date no longer exceeds 
the twelve-month priority period under Art. 87(1) or the priority 
date is no longer the same as the filing date (see A-III, 6.6), 
nor 
(b) 
successfully requested re-establishment of rights in respect of 
the priority claim (see A-III, 6.6) 
(ii) 
the previous application did not seek an industrial property right 
giving rise to a priority right (see A-III, 6.1) or 
(iii) 
the previous application does not give rise to a priority right in respect 
of the state, WTO member or industrial property authority in or for 
which it was filed (see A-III, 6.1(i) and 6.2). 
6.10 Loss of right to priority 
The right to priority for a European patent application is lost where: 
(i) 
the declaration of priority is not filed in due time (see A-III, 6.5.1) 
(ii) 
the declaration of priority is not corrected in due time (see A-III, 6.5.2 
and 6.5.3) 
(iii) 
the certified copy of the previous application is not filed in due time 
(see A-III, 6.7) 
(iv) 
the translation of the previous application or the declaration referred 
to in A-III, 6.8.6 is not filed in due time in response to an invitation 
according to Rule 53(3) (see A-III, 6.8.3). 
6.11 Notification 
The applicant is notified of any non-entitlement to or loss of a priority right. 
The computation of time limits that depend on the priority will take this new 
situation into account. This also applies where entitlement to a priority right 
is surrendered. The termination of a priority right has no effect on a time 
limit that has already expired (see also F-VI, 3.4 and E-VIII, 1.5). If the 
Art. 87(1) 
Art. 87(1) 
Art. 87(1) and 
(4) 
Art. 90(4) and 
(5) 
Rule 53(3) 
Rule 112(1) 
Part A – Chapter III-18 

 
search has not yet been carried out, the Receiving Section notifies the 
search division of a loss of or non-entitlement to a priority date. 
6.12 Copy of the search results for the priority or priorities 
An applicant claiming priority within the meaning of Art. 87 must file a copy 
of the results of any search carried out by the authority with which the 
previous application was filed together with the European patent application 
either without delay after receiving such results or, in the case of a 
Euro-PCT application, on entry into the European phase. This requirement 
also applies to priority claims that are subsequently withdrawn or lapse and 
to priority claims introduced or corrected after the filing date (see A-III, 6.5.1 
and A-III, 6.5.2). The obligation under Rule 141(1) exists as long as the 
application is pending before the EPO and applies to all European and 
Euro-PCT applications filed on or after 1 January 2011 (OJ EPO 2009, 
585). In the case of divisional applications, the relevant date is that on 
which the divisional application was received by the EPO (see A-IV, 1.2.1), 
not the filing date of the parent application. Where the copy is not provided 
to the EPO before the examining division assumes responsibility, the 
procedure is as set out in C-II, 5 and C-III, 6. 
Where multiple priorities are claimed, the copy of the search results 
referred to above must be provided for all applications claimed as priority. If 
the search results are not drawn up in an official EPO language, no 
translation is required. The copy of the search results submitted must be a 
copy of the official document issued by the office where the previous 
application was filed. A simple listing of the prior art drawn up by the 
applicant will not suffice. Copies of the cited documents do not have to be 
provided 
(see 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
28 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 410). 
The copy referred to in Rule 141(1) is deemed duly filed if it is available to 
the EPO and is to be included in the European patent application's file 
under the conditions determined by the EPO President. According to the 
decision 
of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
5 October 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 600, these exceptions relate to cases where a search report 
of the following type was drawn up by the EPO on an application whose 
priority is claimed: 
(i) 
European search report (Art. 92) 
(ii) 
international search report (Art. 15(1) PCT) 
(iii) 
international-type search report (Art. 15(5) PCT) 
(iv) 
search report prepared on behalf of a national office on a national 
application. As at October 2021, the EPO performs searches for the 
national offices of Albania, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus, France, 
Greece, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, 
Netherlands, San Marino, United Kingdom. 
The EPO also includes a copy of the search results referred to in 
Rule 141(1) in the European patent application's file, thus exempting the 
Rule 141(1) 
Rule 141(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-19 
applicant from filing said copy where, based on an agreement with the 
national patent offices, the priority of a first filing made in one of the 
following states is claimed: 
– 
Austria (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
19 September 2012, OJ EPO 2012, 540) 
– 
People's Republic of China (see the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 8 April 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A38) 
– 
Czech Republic (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
11 July 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A79) 
– 
Denmark (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
10 December 2014, OJ EPO 2015, A2) 
– 
Japan (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
9 December 2010, OJ EPO 2011, 62) 
– 
Republic of Korea (see the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 27 February 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 216) 
– 
Spain (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
10 February 2016, OJ EPO 2016, A18) 
– 
Sweden (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
14 May 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A39) 
– 
Switzerland (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
4 June 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A55) 
– 
United Kingdom (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
9 December 2010, OJ EPO 2011, 62) 
– 
United States of America (see the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 9 December 2010, OJ EPO 2011, 62) 
For divisional applications, where the results of the search on the claimed 
priority have already been provided in respect of the parent application, the 
applicant need not provide them again in respect of the divisional 
application 
(see 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
28 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 410). 
Part A – Chapter III-20 

 
7. 
Title of the invention 
7.1 Requirements 
The request for grant must contain the title of the invention. A requirement 
of Rule 41(2)(b) is that the title must clearly and concisely state the 
technical designation of the invention and must exclude all fancy names. In 
this regard, the following should be taken into account: 
(i) 
personal names, fancy names, the word "patent" or similar terms of a 
non-technical nature that do not serve to identify the invention should 
not be used 
(ii) 
the abbreviation "etc.", being vague, should not be used and should 
be replaced by an indication of what it is intended to cover 
(iii) 
titles such as "Method", "Apparatus", "Chemical Compounds" alone 
or similar vague titles do not meet the requirement that the title must 
clearly state the technical designation of the invention 
(iv) 
trade names and trade marks should also not be used; the Receiving 
Section, however, need only intervene when names are used which, 
according to common general knowledge, are trade names or 
trade marks. 
7.2 Responsibility 
The examining division bears ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the 
title accords with the provisions of the Implementing Regulations. The 
search division will nevertheless take action and amend the title to avoid, if 
possible, the publication of applications having titles that obviously do not 
comply with the applicable EPC provisions (see also F-II, 3). In such cases, 
the EPO will change the title on its own initiative if this appears necessary 
(see OJ EPO 1991, 224). 
The applicant learns if the title proposed has been approved by the search 
division upon transmission of the European search report. The wording of 
the title (in the three official EPO languages), as approved by the search 
division, is notified by the communication announcing the forthcoming 
publication. 
The title of the invention is published and entered in the European Patent 
Register (Rule 143(1)(c)) in capital letters. 
8. 
Prohibited matter 
8.1 Morality or "ordre public" 
The application must not contain statements or other matter contrary to 
"ordre public" or morality. Such matter may be omitted when the application 
is published, the published application indicating the place and number of 
words or drawings omitted. (Where drawings are omitted regard should be 
had to the physical requirements of A-III, 3.2.) The Receiving Section may 
check the description, claims and drawings to ascertain whether they 
contain offending matter. In order not to delay unduly the formalities 
Rule 41(2)(b) 
Rule 41(2)(b) 
Art. 53(a) 
Rule 48(1)(a) and 
(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-21 
examination, if carried out, this will entail a cursory examination to ensure 
that the application does not contain the following prohibited matter: 
statements constituting an incitement to riot or to acts contrary to "ordre 
public", racial, religious or similar discriminatory propaganda, or criminal 
acts and grossly obscene matter. The Receiving Section may also take 
action to prevent the publication of such matter where the search division 
draws its attention to such matter which it had overlooked. The applicant is 
notified of the material omitted. In practice, it will usually be the search 
division that brings the existence of such material in the application to the 
attention of the Receiving Section. 
8.2 Disparaging statements 
According to Rule 48(1)(b), the application must not contain statements 
disparaging the products or processes of any particular person other than 
the applicant, or the merit or validity of applications or patents of any such 
person. However, mere comparisons with the prior art are not to be 
considered disparaging per se. Statements clearly falling into this category 
that are evident from the cursory examination referred to in A-III, 8.1 or to 
which attention is drawn by the search division may be omitted by the 
Receiving Section when publishing the application. In cases of doubt the 
matter should be left for the examining division. The published application 
must indicate the place and number of any words omitted and the EPO 
must furnish, upon request, a copy of the passage omitted. The applicant is 
again notified of the material omitted. (See also treatment of prohibited 
matter in proceedings before the examining division, F-II, 7.) 
9. Claims fee 
A European patent application containing more than 15 claims at the time 
of filing the claims (see the paragraph below) incurs a claims fee in respect 
of each claim in excess of that number. For applications filed and 
international applications entering the regional phase on or after 
1 April 2009, a higher amount is payable for each claim in excess of 50. 
The claims' order is their sequence at their time of filing. If an application 
contains more than one set of claims, Rule 45 only applies to the set of 
claims containing the highest number of claims. If, as a result of claims 
having been deleted owing to non-payment of claims fees, the number of 
claims remaining in the set that originally incurred the fees falls below that 
of another set, then the number of claims in the latter set has to be reduced 
to the same number as that remaining in the set originally incurring the fees 
(see J 8/84). The claims fees must be paid within one month of filing the 
claims. 
Where correct claims are filed under Rule 56a(3) or (4) (see A-II, 6), the 
claims fee is calculated on the basis of the set of claims first filed. 
The claims may be filed at the following stages: 
(a) 
on the filing date or on the date on which the divisional application is 
filed (see A-II, 4.1.5 and A-IV, 1.2.1) 
(b) 
after the filing date, in a timely response to a communication from the 
EPO indicating their absence under Rule 58 (see A-III, 15) 
Rule 48(1)(b) and 
(3) 
Rule 45(1) to 
(3) 
Rule 112(1) 
Rule 37(2) 
Art. 2(1), item 15, 
RFees 
Part A – Chapter III-22 

 
(c) 
after the filing date, by applicants on their own initiative before the 
EPO sends a communication according to Rule 58 (see A-III, 15). 
Consequently, the claims fees must be paid within one month of whichever 
of the above dates of receipt applies. 
If the claims fees have not been paid in due time, they may still be validly 
paid within a non-extendable grace period of one month from notification of 
a communication under Rule 45(2) pointing out the failure to observe the 
time limit. The applicant cannot waive this communication. If a claims fee is 
not paid within the grace period, the corresponding claim is deemed 
abandoned and the applicant is notified accordingly. The applicant cannot 
waive the communication under Rule 112(1) noting the deemed 
abandonment of claims under Rule 45(3). If the claims fees paid are 
insufficient to cover all the claims incurring fees (i.e. claim 16 onwards), and 
if when payment was made no indication was given as to which claims 
were covered by the fees paid, then the applicant is requested to specify 
which claims incurring fees are covered by the claims fees paid. The 
Receiving Section notifies the search division of claims that are deemed 
abandoned. Any claims fee duly paid is refunded only in the case referred 
to in Rule 37(2) (see A-II, 3.2, last paragraph). 
In cases where: 
(i) 
the application was filed by reference to a previously filed application 
(see A-II, 4.1.3.1) and 
(ii) 
the applicant indicates on filing that the claims of this previously filed 
application take the place of claims in the application as filed, 
the claims fees are due within one month of the filing date (since the claims 
of the previously filed application are effectively present on the filing date). 
However, the EPO will not send the applicant a communication under 
Rule 45(2) with an invitation to pay any claims fees due until the applicant 
has, within two months of the filing date (Rule 40(3)), filed the copy of the 
previously filed application, since it is only at this point that the EPO will 
know how many claims there are and consequently how many claims fees, 
if any, are due. 
Features of a claim deemed abandoned under Rule 45(3) and not 
otherwise to be found in the description or drawings cannot subsequently 
be reintroduced into the application and, in particular, into the claims 
(see J 15/88). However, by filing a divisional application, applicants can 
pursue any (features of a) claim deemed abandoned due to non-payment 
of the claims fee in the procedure for the grant of a patent for the parent 
application. 
Regarding 
Euro-PCT 
applications 
entering 
the 
European 
phase, 
see E-IX, 2.1.3 and E-IX, 2.3.8. 
 

Part A – Chapter III-23 
10. Abstract 
10.1 General remark 
Every application for a patent must contain an abstract. The effect of 
non-compliance with this requirement is dealt with in A-III, 16. 
10.2 Content of the abstract 
While responsibility for the definitive content of the abstract lies with the 
EPO (see F-II, 2), in practice, this is delegated to the search division since 
the definitive content of the abstract must be determined and transmitted to 
the applicant along with the search report. Where the search division 
confirms that the abstract filed does not relate to the claimed invention, the 
applicant is informed that the document filed does not constitute an abstract 
and is invited to correct the deficiency (see A-III, 16). 
10.3 Figure accompanying the abstract 
If the application contains drawings, applicants should indicate the figure 
(or figures, in exceptional cases) of the drawings that they suggest should 
accompany the abstract. Where this requirement is not met, the search 
division decides which figure(s) to publish. For the further procedure, 
see F-II, 2.4. 
11. Designation of contracting states 
11.1 General remarks 
All states party to the EPC at the application's filing date are deemed 
designated in the request for grant of a European patent (for a list of the 
EPC contracting states, see General Part, section 6). Any other state 
entered on the request for grant must be disregarded (for the designation of 
contracting states on the request for grant form, see A-III, 11.2.2, 11.3.5 
and 11.3.6). When the application is in the name of joint applicants, each 
may designate different contracting states (see A-II, 2); objection is to be 
raised during the examination of formal requirements if there is any 
ambiguity as to the states designated by the individual applicants. 
11.2 European patent applications filed on or after 1 April 2009 
11.2.1 Designation fee; time limits 
A designation fee is payable for designating contracting states. 
For applications filed on or after 1 April 2009 this is a flat fee covering all 
EPC contracting states. Therefore, for these applications, the system of 
charging designation fees for individual designated states (see A-III, 11.3) 
no longer applies. For European divisional applications, see also 
A-IV, 1.3.4 and 1.4.1. 
For European patent applications, the designation fee must be paid within 
six months of the date on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the 
publication of the European search report. 
Art. 78(1)(e) 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 57(d) 
Rule 66 
Rule 47(4) 
Art. 79(1) 
Art. 79(2) 
Rule 39 
Art. 149(1) 
Art. 2(1), item 3, 
RFees 
Rule 39 
Part A – Chapter III-24 

 
For divisional applications and new applications under Art. 61(1)(b), the 
designation fee must be paid within six months of the date on which the 
European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the European search 
report drawn up in respect of the European divisional application or the new 
European patent application (see A-IV, 1.4.1). 
For Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase on or after 
1 April 2009, see A-III, 11.2.5. 
11.2.2 Payment of designation fee 
All states party to the EPC at the time of filing a European patent 
application are automatically designated when the application is filed. The 
designation fee, however, may be paid later (see A-III, 11.2.1). 
Payment of the designation fee covers all contracting states, except those 
for which the designation has been expressly withdrawn. 
11.2.3 Consequences of non-payment of the designation fee 
An application is deemed withdrawn where the designation fee has not 
been paid by expiry of the period specified in Rule 39(1). 
In this case, the EPO sends the applicant a communication under 
Rule 112(1) notifying them of the loss of rights. In response, the applicant 
can request further processing according to Art. 121 and Rule 135 
(see E-VIII, 2). 
The loss of rights ensues on expiry of the period under Rule 39(1) and not 
on 
expiry 
of 
the 
period 
for 
further 
processing 
(see G 4/98, 
mutatis mutandis). 
For Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase on or after 
1 April 2009, see A-III, 11.2.5. 
11.2.4 Withdrawal of designation 
Subject to the final sentence of this paragraph, the applicant may withdraw 
the designation of one or more contracting states at any time up to the 
patent's grant. Withdrawing the designation of all contracting states results 
in the application being deemed withdrawn and the applicant being notified 
accordingly. 
In neither case is a validly paid designation fee refunded (see A-X, 10.1.1). 
A contracting state's designation may not be withdrawn from the date a 
third party proves to the EPO that they have initiated entitlement 
proceedings and up to the date when the EPO resumes proceedings for 
grant. 
The applicant may withdraw designations when filing the European patent 
application, e.g. to avoid overlapping prior national rights with the priority 
application according to Art. 139(3). Timely payment of the designation fee 
will not cause those designations that have been withdrawn to be 
reactivated. 
Rule 17(3) 
Rule 36(4) 
Rule 39(1) 
Art. 2(1), item 3, 
RFees 
Rule 39(2) 
Art. 79(3) 
Rule 39(2) and 
(3) 
Rule 15 
 

Part A – Chapter III-25 
For European divisional applications, see A-IV, 1.3.4. 
11.2.5 Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase 
For Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase, the designation 
fee must be paid within 31 months of the filing or priority date, if the time 
limit specified in Rule 39(1) has expired earlier. 
According to Rule 160(1), if the designation fee for the Euro-PCT 
application entering the European phase is not paid within the basic period 
under Rule 159(1)(d), the European patent application (see Art. 153(2)) is 
deemed withdrawn. If the EPO finds that that has occurred, it notifies the 
applicant of this loss of rights according to Rule 112(1). In response, the 
applicant can request further processing according to Art. 121 and 
Rule 135. 
For the designation fee in relation to Euro-PCT applications entering the 
European phase, see also E-IX, 2.1.4 and E-IX, 2.3.11. 
11.3 European patent applications filed before 1 April 2009 
This section refers to the relevant provisions that were in force until 
31 March 2009 and that remain applicable to European patent applications 
filed and Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase before 
1 April 2009. 
11.3.1 Designation fee; time limits 
A designation fee is payable for designating contracting states. A single 
joint designation fee is payable for Switzerland and Liechtenstein. All 
contracting states are deemed designated on payment of seven times the 
amount of one designation fee. 
For European patent applications, the designation fees must be paid within 
six months of the date on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the 
publication of the European search report. 
For divisional applications and new applications under Art. 61(1)(b) filed 
before 1 April 2009, the designation fees must be paid within six months of 
the date on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of 
the European search report drawn up in respect of the European divisional 
application or the new European patent application (see A-IV, 1.4.1). 
For Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase before 
1 April 2009, see A-III, 11.3.9. 
11.3.2 Consequences of non-payment of designation fees 
The designation of a state is deemed withdrawn where the designation fee 
has not been paid in due time for that state (see also A-III, 11.3.4). 
If the designation fee for a particular contracting state is not paid in time, 
the EPO sends the applicant a communication under Rule 112(1) notifying 
them of the designation's deemed withdrawal according to Rule 39(2). In 
response, the applicant can request further processing according to 
Art. 121 and Rule 135 in respect of this partial loss of rights (see E-VIII, 2). 
Rule 159(1)(d) 
Rule 160 
Art. 153(2) 
Art. 79(2) 
Rule 39, in force until 
31 March 2009 
Art. 149(1) 
Art. 2(2), item 3 and 
item 3a RFees 
Rule 17(3), 
in force until 
31 March 2009 
Rule 36(4) 
in force until 
31 March 2009 
Rule 39(2), 
in force until 
31 March 2009 
Part A – Chapter III-26 

 
This communication is not sent if the applicant waives the right to receive it 
in respect of the state in question by selecting the appropriate box on the 
request for grant form. By selecting that box, the applicant waived the right 
to further processing in respect of the designation or designations in 
question. 
For Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase before 
1 April 2009, see A-III, 11.3.9. 
11.3.3 Amount paid insufficient 
If, during the period for requesting further processing, designation fees are 
paid without an additional sum sufficient to cover the further processing fee, 
it is first necessary to establish how many designation fees including the 
further processing fee are covered by the total sum paid. The applicant 
must then be invited, under Art. 6(2), first sentence, RFees, to indicate 
which contracting states the designation fees plus further processing fee 
are to be used for (see J 23/82, mutatis mutandis). For the subsequent 
procedure, see A-III, 11.3.7. 
11.3.4 Application deemed withdrawn 
An application is deemed withdrawn where no designation fee is validly 
paid by expiry of the period specified in Rule 39(1). 
If no designation fees are paid on time leading to the deemed withdrawal of 
the application under Rule 39(3), in force until 31 March 2009, the EPO 
sends the applicant a communication according to Rule 112(1) notifying 
them of this loss of rights. In response, the applicant can request further 
processing according to Art. 121 and Rule 135 in respect of this total loss of 
rights (see E-VIII, 2). 
Where the application is deemed withdrawn because of failure to pay the 
designation fees, the loss of rights ensues on expiry of the normal period 
under Rule 39(1). Similarly, the deemed withdrawal of a contracting state's 
designation takes effect upon expiry of the period under Rule 39(1), and not 
upon expiry of the period for further processing (see G 4/98, mutatis 
mutandis). The applicant is notified of the loss of rights and can remedy it 
by requesting further processing according to the procedures explained in 
A-III, 11.3.2. 
11.3.5 Request for grant form 
All states party to the EPC at the time of filing a European patent 
application are automatically designated when the application is filed. The 
designation fees payable for an application filed before 1 April 2009, 
however, may be paid later. 
Applicants have time – until expiry of the period for paying the designation 
fees (Rule 39(1) and Rules 17(3) and 36(4)) – to decide which contracting 
states they actually want their patent to cover. This is done by paying the 
designation fees for those states, which may include an additional sum 
required to validate a request for further processing. 
Art. 6(2), 
1st sentence, RFees 
Rule 39(3), 
in force until 
31 March 2009 
Art. 79(1) and 
(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-27 
11.3.6 Indication of the contracting states 
For European patent applications filed before 1 April 2009, the designation 
fees are deemed paid for all contracting states on payment of seven times 
the amount of one designation fee. Such payments simply need to be 
marked "designation fees" for the purpose of the payment to be 
established. 
However, if the applicant intended to pay fewer than seven designation 
fees when filing the application, it was for them to indicate the contracting 
states they wanted to designate in the appropriate section of the request for 
grant form (EPO Form 1001, versions prior to April 2009). This was to 
ensure that the designation fees paid were properly entered in the books. 
Non-payment of designation fees within the basic time limit results in a 
communication under Rule 112(1). 
In response, the applicant may request further processing in respect of the 
lost designation(s). However, no Rule 112(1) communication will be sent 
and no further processing can be requested for designations in respect of 
which the applicant waived these rights by selecting the appropriate box on 
the request for grant form or where the designation in question was 
withdrawn. 
For applicants taking part in the automatic debiting procedure, see also 
A-X, 7.2. 
11.3.7 Amount payable 
If, given the amount payable within the time limit in question, the sum paid 
for designation fees during the periods under Rule 39(1) or Rule 135(1) 
does not cover all the contracting states indicated on the request for grant 
form (EPO Form 1001) and no indication is provided of the contracting 
states the fees are intended for, then the payer is requested to indicate, 
within a period stipulated by the EPO, which states are to be designated 
(see also A-III, 11.3.3). If the payer fails to comply in due time, then 
Art. 8(2) RFees applies: the fees are deemed paid only for as many 
designations as are covered by the amount paid in the order in which the 
contracting states were designated (see J 23/82, mutatis mutandis). The 
designation of contracting states not covered by the fees is deemed 
withdrawn and the applicant is notified of the loss of rights 
(see A-III, 11.3.4, paragraph 3, regarding the time at which loss of rights 
ensues). 
11.3.8 Withdrawal of designation 
Subject to the final sentence of this paragraph, the applicant may withdraw 
a contracting state's designation at any time up to the patent's grant. A 
validly paid designation fee is not refunded when a designation is 
withdrawn. Withdrawing the designation of all contracting states results in 
the application being deemed withdrawn and the applicant being notified 
accordingly. A contracting state's designation may not be withdrawn from 
the date a third party proves to the EPO that they have initiated entitlement 
proceedings and up to the date when the EPO resumes proceedings for 
grant. 
Art. 2(2), item 3, 
RFees 
Art. 6(1) RFees 
Art. 6(2), 
1st sentence, RFees 
Art. 8(2) 
2nd sentence, RFees, 
in force until 
31 March 2009 
Rule 39(2), 
in force until 
31 March 2009 
Rule 112(1) 
Art. 79(3) 
Rule 39(3) in force 
until 31 March 2009 
and (4), in force until 
31 March 2009 
Rule 15 
Part A – Chapter III-28 

 
The applicant may withdraw designations when filing the European patent 
application, e.g. to avoid overlapping prior national rights with the priority 
application according to Art. 139(3). Timely payment of designation fees will 
not cause those designations that have been withdrawn to be reactivated. 
Furthermore, no Rule 112(1) communication will be sent in respect of a 
failure to pay designation fees for any designation withdrawn. 
11.3.9 Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase before 
1 April 2009 
For Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase, a designation fee 
with respect to each contracting state designated, up to a maximum of 
seven times the amount of one designation fee to designate all contracting 
states, must be paid within 31 months of the filing or priority date if the time 
limit specified in Rule 39(1) has expired earlier. The principles laid down in 
A-III, 11.3.3, 11.3.6, 11.3.7 and 11.3.8 for European patent applications 
filed before 1 April 2009 apply to Euro-PCT applications in accordance with 
Art. 153(2), with the individual contracting states being indicated in the 
request for entry into the European phase (EPO Form 1200). 
Under Rule 160(2), the designation of a contracting state for which no 
designation fee has been paid in time is deemed withdrawn. According to 
Rule 160(1), if no designation fee is paid within the basic period under 
Rule 159(1)(d) for a Euro-PCT application entering the European phase, 
the European patent application (see Art. 153(2)) is deemed withdrawn. If 
the EPO finds that the deemed withdrawal of a European patent application 
or of a contracting state's designation has occurred, it notifies the applicant 
of this loss of rights according to Rule 112(1). In response, the applicant 
can request further processing according to Art. 121 and Rule 135. 
For designation fees in relation to Euro-PCT applications entering the 
European phase, see also E-IX, 2.1.3 and E-IX, 2.3.11. 
12. Extension and validation of European patent applications and 
patents to/in states not party to the EPC 
12.1 General remarks 
At the applicant's request and on payment of the prescribed fee, European 
patent applications (direct or Euro-PCT) and thus patents can be extended 
to European states having an extension agreement with the EPO 
(extension states). The same applies to requests for validation in European 
or non-European states having a validation agreement (validation states). 
The states for which such requests may currently be filed are listed below: 
(i) 
extension may be requested for the following European state: 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BA) 
since 1 December 2004 
The EPO's extension agreements with the Republic of Slovenia (entry into 
force: 1 March 1994), the Republic of Romania (15 October 1996), the 
Republic 
of 
Lithuania 
(5 July 1994), 
the 
Republic 
of 
Latvia 
(1 May 1995), the Republic of Croatia (1 April 2004), the Republic of 
Rule 159(1)(d) 
Rule 160, in force 
until 31 March 2009 
Art. 153(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-29 
North Macedonia (as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) 
(1 November 1997), Albania (1 February 1996), the Republic of Serbia 
(1 November 2004) and Montenegro (1 March 2010) terminated when 
these countries acceded to the EPC with effect from 1 December 2002, 
1 March 2003, 
1 December 2004, 
1 July 2005, 
1 January 2008, 
1 January 2009, 
1 May 2010, 
1 October 2010 
and 
1 October 
2022 
respectively. However, the extension system continues to apply to all 
European and international applications filed prior to those dates and to all 
European patents granted in respect of such applications. 
(ii) 
validation may be requested for the following states (OJ EPO 2015, 
A20, OJ EPO 2015, A85, OJ EPO 2017, A85, OJ EPO 2018, A16, 
and OJ EPO 2023, A105): 
Morocco (MA) 
since 1 March 2015 
Republic of Moldova (MD) 
since 1 November 2015  
Tunisia (TN) 
since 1 December 2017 
Cambodia (KH) 
since 1 March 2018 
Georgia (GE) 
since 15 January 2024 
Extension and validation agreements are bilateral international treaties 
concluded between the European Patent Organisation and an individual 
state. Within the territory of that state, the effects of a European patent 
application for which an extension or validation request has been filed, or of 
a European patent that has been validated in an extension or validation 
state, are based on national law. The provisions of the EPC, its 
Implementing Regulations and the Rules relating to Fees do not apply to 
the extension and validation systems unless and only to the extent that 
those provisions are referred to by the applicable national law. Thus, the 
EPC provisions concerning applicants' legal remedies and appeals do not 
apply in respect of any action taken by the EPO under the extension or 
validation procedure (see J 14/00, J 4/05 and J 22/10), e.g. where the 
extension or validation fee has not been paid within the applicable time limit 
indicated (A-III, 12.2). Similarly, no different claims, description or drawings 
are acceptable in respect of extension or validation states (see H-III, 4.4), 
as Rule 138 does not apply to the extension and validation systems. 
A request for extension to or validation for the above-mentioned states is 
deemed made with any European patent application filed after entry into 
force and, in the case of the former, before termination of the respective 
extension agreements. This also applies to Euro-PCT applications, 
provided that the EPO has been designated for a European patent and the 
extension or validation state has been designated for a national patent in 
the international application. The request is deemed withdrawn if the 
extension or validation fee is not paid within the prescribed time limit 
(see A-III, 12.2). It is by paying the extension or validation fee that the 
applicant decides to extend the application to an extension state or validate 
it in a validation state. The declaration in the appropriate section of the 
request for grant form (EPO Form 1001) or of EPO Form 1200 for entry into 
the European phase before the EPO where the applicant is asked to state 
whether they intend to pay the extension or validation fee is merely for 
information purposes and intended to assist in recording fee payments. 
Part A – Chapter III-30 

 
A request for extension or validation in respect of a divisional application 
(see A-IV, 1) is deemed made only if the respective request is still effective 
in the parent application when the divisional application is filed. 
12.2 Time limit for payment of extension and validation fees 
Under the applicable national provisions of the extension and validation 
states, the extension or validation fee must be paid 
(i) 
for European patent applications within six months of the date on 
which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the 
European search report  
(ii) 
for Euro-PCT applications within the period for performing the acts 
required for an international application's entry into the European 
phase or within six months of the date of publication of the 
international search report, whichever is the later. 
If the fee for an extension or validation state has not been paid within the 
corresponding basic period (see items (i) and (ii) above), the applicant can 
still pay the extension or validation fee together with a 50% surcharge 
(a) 
within a grace period of two months from expiry of the basic period 
for payment or 
(b) 
if the designation fee has not been paid, along with the filing of a 
valid request for further processing concerning the designation fee, 
within two months of notification of a communication of loss of rights 
with regard to the designation fee (see the notices from the EPO 
dated 2 November 2009, OJ EPO 2009, 603, and 5 February 2015, 
OJ EPO 2015, A19). 
If the applicant fails to pay the extension or validation fee during the basic 
and the grace period, the request for extension or validation is deemed 
withdrawn. No communication of loss of rights is issued. 
However, a noting of loss of rights for failure to pay the designation fee 
under Rule 39(2) or 159(1)(d) will draw the applicant's attention to the 
non-payment of the extension or validation fee, where appropriate, 
triggering the time limit mentioned in item (b) above. 
A request for re-establishment of rights according to Art. 122 and Rule 136 
is not possible in respect of payment of the extension or validation fee. 
12.3 Withdrawal of the extension or validation request 
The request for extension or validation may be withdrawn at any time. It will 
be deemed withdrawn if the European patent or Euro-PCT application is 
finally refused, withdrawn or deemed withdrawn. A separate communication 
is not issued to the applicant. Validly paid extension or validation fees are 
not refunded. 
 

Part A – Chapter III-31 
12.4 Extension and validation deemed requested 
Extension and validation are deemed requested in respect of all extension 
and validation states (see, however, A-III, 12.1, sixth paragraph, regarding 
Euro-PCT applications), and this is indicated in the published application, 
the European Patent Register and the European Patent Bulletin. Those 
states for which the extension or validation fees have been paid are 
subsequently indicated in the European Patent Register, the European 
Patent Bulletin and the published patent specification. 
12.5 National register 
Extension and validation states publish in their national register the relevant 
data relating to European patent applications and patents extending to their 
territory. 
13. Filing and search fees 
13.1 Payment of fees 
The applicant is required to pay a filing fee and, subject to the exception 
mentioned below (see the note to point (iii) below), a search fee. The filing 
and search fees must be paid within the following periods: 
(i) 
where neither (ii) nor (iii) applies, within one month of filing the 
European patent application 
(ii) 
for European divisional applications or European patent applications 
filed according to Art. 61(1)(b), within one month of filing the 
divisional or Art. 61(1)(b) application 
(iii) 
for Euro-PCT applications, within 31 months of the filing date or, 
where applicable, from the earliest claimed priority date*. 
*Note that when a supplementary European search report is dispensed with 
by the EPO (see B-II, 4.3), no search fee is required for the Euro-PCT 
application (Rule 159(1)(e)). 
With regard to applications of types (i) and (ii), the EPO will check that 
these fees have been paid. If either fee is not paid on time, the application 
is deemed withdrawn. The applicant will be notified by the EPO as to the 
loss of rights according to Rule 112(1) and can respond by requesting 
further processing according to Art. 121 and Rule 135. 
Under Art. 2(1) RFees as amended by Administrative Council decision of 
13 December 2017 (OJ EPO 2018, A4), the filing fee amount depends on 
the method and format used for filing the European patent application or its 
translation, if applicable. However, where a fee level relates to a means of 
electronic communication or a particular electronic document format, that 
level only applies when the means or format, as referred to in 
Art. 2(1) RFees, is made available. The date on which such fee level 
applies is to be specified by the EPO President (see Art. 2(4) RFees as 
adopted by Administrative Council decision of 12 December 2018, 
OJ EPO 2019, A3, and the notice from the EPO dated 24 January 2019, 
OJ EPO 2019, A6). At present, for European patent applications, the fee 
Art. 78(2) 
Rule 38 
Rule 36(3) 
Rule 17(2) 
Rule 159(1) 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 57(e) 
Art. 78(2) 
Rule 36(3) 
Rule 17(2) 
Part A – Chapter III-32 

 
levels of the filing fee and of the fee for grant for filing in character-coded 
format (DOCX) are not applied. The latest information on the applicable fee 
levels and amounts can be found on the EPO website (see also A-X, 1). 
With regard to Euro-PCT applications (type (iii)), see E-IX, 2.1.4. 
For the reduction of the filing fee under the language arrangements, see 
A-X, 9.2.1 and 9.2.2. 
13.2 Additional fee (if application documents comprise more than 35 
pages) 
This section relates only to applications filed and international applications 
entering the European phase on or after 1 April 2009 (see also the notice 
from the EPO dated 26 January 2009, OJ EPO 2009, 118, and its 
supplement, OJ EPO 2009, 338). 
EP-direct applications 
An additional fee is payable as part of the filing fee for European patent 
applications filed on or after 1 April 2009 and comprising more than 35 
pages. The fee amount depends on the number of pages over 35. The 
language reduction under Rule 6(3) applies if the requirements of 
Rule 6(4), (6) and (7) have been met (see A-X, 9.2.1 and A-X, 9.2.2). The 
additional fee is payable within one month of the application's filing date or 
of the date of receipt of a European divisional application or a European 
patent application according to Art. 61(1)(b). If the application is filed 
without claims or by reference to a previously filed application, the 
additional fee is payable within one month of filing the first set of claims or 
the certified copy of the application referred to in Rule 40(3), whichever 
expires later. The additional fee is calculated on the basis of the pages of 
the description, claims, any drawings and one page for the abstract, in the 
language of filing. Where formal deficiencies in the documents making up 
the European patent application need to be corrected, the number of pages 
complying with the physical requirements (see A-III, 3 and A-IX) is taken as 
the basis for calculation. In particular, deficiencies relating to minimum 
margins, each document making up the application starting on a new sheet, 
line spacing and character size as well as the scale of drawings can 
potentially impact the number of pages (see the decision of the President of 
the EPO dated 25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113). Where this is the 
case, any additional fee due for the higher number of pages may be paid 
within two months of the invitation under Rule 58 drawing the applicant's 
attention to this requirement. 
The pages of the request for grant (EPO Form 1001) and those forming 
part of a sequence listing within the meaning of Rule 30(1) are not counted, 
provided the sequence listing contained in the description is filed in XML 
format, in compliance with WIPO Standard ST.26 (see OJ EPO 2021, A97). 
By way of exception, an additional fee is not due either for a parent 
application's ST.25 sequence listing filed in PDF format as part of a 
divisional application (see OJ EPO 2023, A98, and A-IV, 5.4). If the 
application is filed by reference to a previously filed application, the pages 
of the certified copy  are taken as the basis for the calculation, excluding 
Rule 6(3) to (7) 
Rule 38(2) and 
(3) 
Art. 2(1), item 1a, 
RFees 
Rule 49 
 

Part A – Chapter III-33 
the pages for the certification, for bibliographic data and any sequence 
listing in ST.25 format contained in the certified copy under Rule 40(3). If 
the application is filed without claims, the additional fee takes account of 
the pages of the first set of claims filed. 
Where missing parts are filed under Rule 56 (see A-II, 5) or correct 
application documents are filed under Rule 56a (see A-II, 6), the additional 
fee is calculated on the basis of the documents present at expiry of the time 
limit under Rule 38(3). 
Euro-PCT applications 
For international (Euro-PCT) applications entering the European phase on 
or after 1 April 2009, the additional fee is payable as part of the filing fee 
within the 31-month period of Rule 159(1). In general, is calculated on the 
basis of the international application as published, regardless of the 
language of publication. The pages of the description, claims and drawings 
are counted, as well as one page for the bibliographic data with abstract. 
Any amendments under Art. 19 and/or 34 PCT are also considered part of 
the international publication and are taken into account for calculating the 
additional fee unless the applicant indicates that the procedure in the 
European phase is not to be based on them. The indications made in EPO 
Form 1200 should be clear so the EPO can readily identify the pages for 
which the additional fee is payable. 
The pages of EPO Form 1200 itself and those forming part of a standard-
compliant sequence listing under Rule 30(1) are not counted. 
Amended application 
If amendments are filed on entry into the European phase, the basis for 
calculating the additional fee depends on the language in which the 
international application was published, i.e. one of the EPO's official 
languages or another language, e.g. Chinese. 
(i) 
International publication is in an EPO language 
The additional fee is based on the application as published, whereby 
any amended pages replace the respective pages of the application 
as published. 
If the claims have been amended, the applicant must submit the 
entire set, even if the amendment concerns only some of them. The 
additional fee is then based on the entire set of claims as amended. 
(ii) 
International publication is not in an EPO language 
If no amendments are filed on entry into the European phase, the 
application as published in a non-EPO language (e.g. Chinese) is 
taken as the basis for calculating the additional fee. However, if 
pages are amended, the translation of the application as required 
under Art. 153(4) and Rule 159(1)(a) is taken as the basis instead. 
Part A – Chapter III-34 

 
This is because the replacement pages are in a different language to 
the published pages, which would make a proper calculation of the 
additional fee impossible. Therefore, if the description or drawings 
are amended, the translation of the description or drawings is taken 
as the basis for calculating the additional fee. In this case, the 
amended pages replace the respective pages of the description or 
drawings as translated. 
If only the claims are amended, the additional fee is based on the 
description and drawings as published in Chinese plus the entire set 
of claims as amended in the EPO language. If the claims are not 
amended, the additional fee is based on the claims as published in 
Chinese. 
If the applicant explicitly states that application documents filed on 
entry into the European phase have merely been reformatted (to 
reduce the number of pages subject to payment of an additional fee) 
rather than substantively amended, the EPO disregards these 
reformatted application documents and does not accept them as the 
basis for calculation of the additional fee (see the notice from the 
EPO 
dated 
26 January 
2009, 
OJ EPO 2009, 
118, 
and 
its 
supplement, OJ EPO 2009, 338). 
In application of the general principles described above, for international 
applications comprising both erroneously filed application documents and 
correct application documents incorporated by reference (Rule 20.6 PCT in 
conjunction with Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT), irrespective of their date of filing 
(see OJ EPO 2020, A81, and OJ EPO 2022, A71; see also C-III, 1.3), the 
additional fee must be paid for all application documents contained in the 
international publication unless any are replaced by amendments filed on 
entry into the European phase, as specified by the applicant. 
For international applications with an international filing date on or before 
31 October 2022, corrections that the receiving Office allowed to be 
incorporated under Rule 20.6 PCT in conjunction with Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT 
are not effective in proceedings before the EPO as designated or elected 
Office (see OJ EPO 2020, A81). Nevertheless, the above general principles 
for calculating the additional fee apply. However, where applicants choose 
the abridged procedure outlined in C-III, 1.3 and the declaration to 
renounce the correct application documents incorporated by reference 
under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT is received within the 31-month period for 
entering the European phase and before payment of the additional fee, this 
renunciation is, for the calculation of the additional fee, equal to an 
amendment of the international application as published. Accordingly, those 
pages identified in the publication of the international application as 
"Incorporated by reference (Rule 20.6)" are deducted from the international 
application as published. The same principle applies if, within the 31-month 
period for entering the European phase, the applicants declare their 
intention to renounce the erroneously filed application documents and, 
thus, the initial filing date. In that case, the erroneously filed pages are 
deducted from the international application as published when calculating 
the additional fee. 
 

Part A – Chapter III-35 
Where the international application was published in a non-EPO language, 
the general practice described above also applies. Since the applicant's 
intention to follow the abridged procedure on entry into the European phase 
is considered an amendment of the international application as published, 
the additional fee is calculated on the basis of the translation of those 
application documents that are maintained for the further proceedings 
(either the correct application documents incorporated by reference or the 
erroneously filed ones) and any further amendments replacing (part of) 
them 
(see 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
14 June 2020, 
OJ EPO 2020, A81). 
Example 1: 
International application, published in English, containing 100 pages: 
Abstract 
1 
Description 
50 
Claims 
20 
Drawings 
20 
claims, Art. 19 PCT 
9 
Total pages 
100 
Amended claims (EP entry) 
10 
On entry into European phase, within the 31-month period, 10 pages of 
amended claims are filed to replace previous pages of claims, as indicated 
by the applicant in EPO Form 1200. 
-> number of pages on which calculation is based: 100 - 20 (original claims) 
- 9 (Art. 19 PCT) + 10 (amended claims on EP entry) - 35 (fee-exempt) 
-> number of pages to be paid for: 46 
Example 2: 
International application, published in Chinese, containing 75 pages: 
Number of 
pages in 
Chinese 
(ZH) 
Number of pages in 
English (EN), 
translation filed on 
entry into the 
European phase 
Abstract 
1 
1 
Description 
40 
50 
Claims 
15 
25 
Drawings 
19 
19 
Total number of pages 
75 
95 
Amended description of 
the translation 
- 
3 
On entry into the European phase, the translation into English is filed within 
the 31-month period. Three pages of the translated description as originally 
Part A – Chapter III-36 

 
filed are replaced by three amended pages, as indicated by the applicant in 
EPO Form 1200. 
-> number of pages on which calculation is based: 35 (abstract, claims and 
drawings in ZH) + 47 (EN translation of description - 3) + 3 (amended 
description of the translation) - 35 (fee-exempt) 
-> number of pages to be paid for: 50 
If in the above example only the claims are amended, the additional fee is 
based on the description, drawings and abstract as published in Chinese 
and the translation of the entire set of claims as amended. 
Pages of amendments filed after the additional fee's payment date, in 
particular during the Rule 161(1) or Rule 161(2) period (see E-IX, 3), are 
not taken into account. Consequently, if amendments filed at this stage 
reduce the number of pages already paid for, no refund will be made. 
If the additional fee is not paid on time, the application is deemed 
withdrawn. The EPO will notify the applicant of the loss of rights according 
to Rule 112(1); the applicant can request further processing according to 
Art. 121 and Rule 135. The further processing fee is calculated on the basis 
of the number of pages on file at the relevant period's expiry and for which 
the additional fee, calculated as set out above has not been paid. The 
amount of the further processing fee in respect of the additional fee does 
not 
take 
into 
account 
the 
basic 
filing 
fee 
according 
to 
Art. 2(1), item 1, RFees if this was paid on time. 
13.3 Additional fee for divisional applications 
Regarding the additional fee payable as part of the filing fee for divisional 
applications of second or subsequent generations filed on or after 
1 April 2014, see A-IV, 1.4.1.1 and the notice from the EPO dated 
8 January 2014, OJ EPO 2014, A22. 
14. Translation of the application 
There are three situations in which a translation of the European patent 
application will be required: 
(i) 
the European patent application was filed according to Art. 14(2) in a 
non-EPO language  
(ii) 
the European patent application was filed by reference to a 
previously filed application in a non-EPO language (Rule 40(3)) 
(iii) 
the European divisional application was filed in the same language 
as the earlier (parent) application on which it is based, where this 
was not an official EPO language (Rule 36(2) – see A-IV, 1.3.3). 
In all cases, a translation of the application must be filed at the EPO: in 
cases (i) and (ii) this must occur within two months of the filing date 
according to Rule 6(1) (for type (i)) or Rule 40(3) (for type (ii)); in case (iii) it 
Art. 78(2) 
Rule 38(4) 
Art. 2(1), item 1b, 
RFees 
Art. 14(2) 
Rule 6(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter III-37 
must occur within two months of the divisional application's filing according 
to Rule 36(2). 
The EPO will check compliance with this requirement. If the translation has 
not been filed, the EPO will invite the applicant to rectify this deficiency 
under Rule 58 within two months in accordance with the procedure 
explained in A-III, 16. 
Failure to file the translation on time in response to the invitation under 
Rule 58 results in the application being deemed withdrawn according to 
Art. 14(2). The EPO will then notify the applicant of this loss of rights 
according to Rule 112(1). Further processing is ruled out by Rule 135(2) for 
the above time limits for supplying the translation under Rule 40(3), 
Rule 6(1) and Rule 36(2) and for the time limit for rectifying the failure to file 
the translation under Rule 58. Consequently, further processing is not 
possible in this case. However, the applicant may request re-establishment 
according to Art. 122 and Rule 136 for failure to comply with the time limit 
under Rule 58. 
For translations in respect of international applications entering the 
European phase, see E-IX, 2.1.2. 
15. Late filing of claims 
To obtain a filing date, the European patent application does not have to 
contain any claims. The presence of at least one claim is nonetheless a 
requirement for a European patent application according to Art. 78(1)(c), 
but a set of claims can be provided after the filing date according to the 
procedure described below. 
The EPO will check whether at least one claim is present in the application. 
If there is not, the EPO will issue an invitation under Rule 58 inviting the 
applicant to file one or more claims within two months. If the applicant fails 
to do so within this period, the application is refused according to Art. 90(5). 
The applicant is notified of this decision according to Rule 111. Further 
processing for failure to observe the time limit under Rule 58 is ruled out 
under Rule 135(2). The applicant may, however, request re-establishment 
according to Art. 122 and Rule 136 or may appeal. 
Where the application documents as originally filed did not include at least 
one claim, applicants may also file claims on their own initiative after the 
filing date but before the EPO invites them to do so under Rule 58. In this 
case, the EPO does not issue a communication under Rule 58. 
If the applicant does supply a set of claims in response to the invitation 
under Rule 58, the claims must have a basis in the application documents 
(description and any drawings) provided on the filing date (Art. 123(2)). This 
requirement will first be checked at the search stage (see B-XI, 2.2). 
If the application was filed by means of a reference to a previously filed 
application in accordance with Rule 40(3) and the applicant indicated on 
the filing date that the previously filed application's claims were to take the 
place of claims in the application as filed (see A-II, 4.1.3.1), then, provided 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 57(a) 
Rule 58 
Art. 80 
Rule 40(1) 
Art. 90(3) and 
(5) 
Rule 57(c) 
Rule 58 
Part A – Chapter III-38 

 
the previously filed application also contained claims on its filing date, 
claims were present on the filing date and no communication under Rule 58 
will be sent. 
The above procedure also applies to divisional applications (Art. 76(1)) and 
applications filed in accordance with Art. 61(1)(b). 
16. Correction of deficiencies 
16.1 Procedure for formalities officers 
Where, when examining for compliance with the requirements set out in 
earlier sections of this chapter, the formalities officer discovers deficiencies 
that may be corrected, they must give the applicant the opportunity to 
rectify each such deficiency within a specified period. The most common 
potential deficiencies at this stage of the procedure and the provisions 
governing their rectification are: 
A-III, 2 
Representation 
Rule 58 
A-III, 3 
Physical requirements 
Rule 58 
A-III, 4 
Request for grant 
Rule 58 
A-III, 5 
Designation of inventor 
Rule 60 
A-III, 6 
Claim to priority 
Rule 52(3), Rule 59 
A-III, 9 
Payment of claims fees 
Rule 45 
A-III, 10 Abstract 
Rule 58 
A-III, 13 Filing fee, including any 
additional fee, search fee 
Rule 112(1), Rule 135 
A-III, 14 Translation of the application 
Rule 58 
A-III, 15 Late filing of claims 
Rule 58 
A-IV, 5 
Late furnishing of a standard-
compliant sequence listing 
Rule 30(3) 
The formalities officer should raise all formal objections that become 
evident from a first examination of the application – with the exception of 
those noted in A-III, 3.2 – in the appropriate communication. The definitive 
resolution of certain matters will likely be impossible at this stage, e.g. filing 
of priority documents for which the filing period has not expired, and further 
reports may be necessary. If the applicant is required to appoint a 
representative but has not done so, the formalities officer should deal with 
only this deficiency in the first report. Any request(s) for correction of other 
deficiencies will not be sent until a representative has been appointed, and 
will be sent to that representative. 
16.2 Period allowed for remedying deficiencies 
The period for remedying the following deficiencies is two months from a 
communication pointing them out according to Rule 58: 
(i) 
non-appointment of a representative where the applicant has neither 
residence nor principal place of business in a contracting state – 
see A-III, 2 (regarding failure to file an authorisation where this is 
necessary, see A-VIII, 1.5 and the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, L.1) 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 58 
 

Part A – Chapter III-39 
(ii) 
documents making up the application not complying with physical 
requirements (see A-III, 3) 
(iii) 
request for grant (with the exception of the priority criteria) not 
satisfactory (see A-III, 4) 
(iv) 
abstract not filed (see A-III, 10) 
(v) 
where required, translation of the application not filed (see A-III, 14) 
(vi) 
no claims (see A-III, 15). 
The period under Rule 58 is not extendable. If the above deficiencies 
under (i)-(iv) or (vi) are not rectified in time, the application is refused under 
Art. 90(5). If the deficiency under (v) is not rectified in time, the application 
is deemed withdrawn under Art. 14(2). Under Rule 135(2), further 
processing is ruled out for all of the above losses of rights, which all arise 
from the failure to observe the time limit of Rule 58. 
The following deficiencies are rectified under provisions other than Rule 58: 
(vii) 
non-payment of the claims fees (Rule 45 – see A-III, 9) 
(viii) priority document or file number of the previous application is missing 
(Rule 59 – see A-III, 6) 
(ix) 
non-payment of filing fee, including any additional fee, and search 
fee (see A-III, 13) 
(x) 
non-filing of a standard-compliant sequence listing (Rule 30(3) – 
see A-IV, 5). 
According to Rule 45(2), the period for remedying deficiencies related to 
the payment of claims fees under (vii) is one month from a communication 
pointing out their non-payment. Failure to correct this deficiency in time 
leads to the claims in question being deemed abandoned under Rule 45(3). 
Further processing applies to this loss of rights. 
Deficiencies under (viii) are to be corrected within two months of a 
communication under Rule 59. This period can be extended under 
Rule 132(2) (see E-IX, 2.3.5 for Euro-PCT applications) but further 
processing is ruled out by Rule 135(2). Failure to correct this deficiency in 
time leads to the loss of the priority right. 
Failure to pay the filing, additional or search fee on time results in the 
deemed withdrawal of the application according to Art. 78(2). This loss of 
rights ensues directly on expiry of the applicable time limit (see A-III, 13). 
Deficiencies under (ix) can be corrected by requesting further processing. 
The deficiency under Rule 30(1) can be corrected within two months of a 
communication under Rule 30(3). This period is not extendable but further 
Art. 90(5) 
Art. 14(2) 
Rule 45 
Art. 90(5) 
Rule 59 
Art. 78(2) 
Rule 30 
Part A – Chapter III-40 

 
processing is available. Failure to correct this deficiency in time leads to the 
refusal of the European patent application (see A-IV, 5). 
Where appropriate, the search division is informed of any loss of rights. 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-1 
Chapter IV – Special provisions 
1. European divisional applications (see also C-IX, 1) 
1.1 General remarks 
A divisional application may be filed relating to any pending earlier 
European patent application. A divisional application filed on the same day 
as the parent application is not considered validly filed. The term "earlier 
application" is understood to mean an application filed at least one day 
before the divisional application and refers to the immediate application on 
which the divisional application is based ("parent application"). Where the 
earlier application is a Euro-PCT application, a divisional application can 
only be filed upon the earlier application's effective entry into the European 
phase (see E-IX, 2.4.1). 
The divisional application is accorded the same filing date as the parent 
application and benefits from any priority right of the parent application in 
respect of the subject-matter contained in the divisional application (see 
A-IV, 1.2.1). 
Where the applicant inserts missing parts of the description and/or missing 
drawings under Rule 56 (see A-II, 5) or corrects erroneously filed parts 
under Rule 56a (see A-II, 6) after the divisional application's date of receipt, 
the requirements of Rule 36(1) may no longer be fulfilled (see A-IV, 1.1.1). 
If the divisional application claims priority, the date of receipt does not 
change if the missing parts or the correct application documents are 
completely contained in the earlier application whose priority is claimed 
(Art. 88(1)). 
A European patent application may give rise to more than one divisional 
application. A divisional application may itself give rise to one or more 
divisional applications. 
Where a divisional application is deemed not validly filed due to 
non-fulfilment of one of the filing conditions (see also A-IV, 1.1.1 and 1.1.3), 
the applicant will be duly informed in a communication under Rule 112(1) 
stating that the application will not be processed as a European divisional 
application and providing the opportunity to apply for a decision on the 
EPO's findings under Rule 112(2) (see E-VIII, 1.9.3). Any fees paid will be 
refunded if the loss of rights becomes final. 
1.1.1 Pendency of the earlier application 
The parent application must be pending when a divisional application is 
filed. Reference is made in this regard to the observations in G 1/09 and 
J 18/09 as to what constitutes a pending application. In the case of an 
application filed as a divisional application from an application that is itself a 
divisional application, it is sufficient that the latter is still pending on the 
second divisional application's date of receipt. 
An application is pending up to (but not on) the date that the European 
Patent Bulletin mentions the grant of the patent (OJ EPO 2002, 112). 
Rule 134 does not apply in this case. It is not possible to validly file a 
Art. 76 
Rule 36(1) 
Part A – Chapter IV-2 

 
divisional application when the parent application has been finally refused, 
withdrawn or is deemed withdrawn (see also the paragraphs below). 
If an application is deemed withdrawn due to non-observance of a time 
limit (e.g. following failure to pay the filing fee (Art. 78(2)), a renewal fee 
(Art. 86(1)), the fee for grant and publishing or the claims fees, or to file the 
translation of the claims (Rule 71(7)) in due time), the application is no 
longer pending when the non-observed time limit has expired. 
If a renewal fee is not paid by the due date (Rule 51(1)), the application is 
pending up to the last day of the six-month period for payment of that fee 
with an additional fee (Rule 51(2), first sentence), and a divisional 
application may still be filed during this period – even if the fees are 
ultimately not paid. Deemed withdrawal of the application takes effect on 
expiry of the six-month period (Rule 51(2), second sentence). 
Once the application is deemed withdrawn, a divisional application can only 
be validly filed if the loss of rights, as communicated under Rule 112(1), is 
subsequently remedied. In such a case, the application is deemed to have 
been pending throughout. 
Depending on the non-observed time limit, the loss of rights may be 
remedied either by means of an allowable request for further processing 
(see E-VIII, 2) or, where applicable, by a request for re-establishment of 
rights (see E-VIII, 3). Furthermore, if the findings in the notice of loss of 
rights are considered inaccurate, the applicant may also request a decision 
under Rule 112(2) (see E-VIII, 1.9.3). If the competent EPO body shares 
this opinion or if it gives an unfavourable decision that is subsequently 
overturned on appeal, no loss of rights will have ever occurred and the 
application will have been pending throughout (see J 4/11, reasons 22). 
The same applies if the appeal decision is set aside by the grant of a 
petition for review and the appeal proceedings are reopened under 
Art. 112a(5), with the consequence that the decision under Rule 112(2) is 
overturned. 
If an application has been refused and no appeal has (yet) been filed, the 
application is still pending within the meaning of Rule 36(1) until expiry of 
the time limit for filing the notice of appeal (Art. 108), and a divisional 
application can be validly filed until this period expires (see G 1/09). Where 
the applicant does validly file a notice of appeal but fails to submit the 
written statement setting out the grounds of appeal, the refused application 
is pending until the time limit for filing the grounds of appeal under Art. 108 
expires (see J 23/13). If the grounds of appeal are submitted in due time, 
the decision to refuse cannot take effect until the appeal proceedings are 
over. As the provisions relating to the filing of divisional applications also 
apply in appeal proceedings (Rule 100(1)), a divisional application may 
then be filed while such appeal proceedings are under way. If the appeal 
proceedings are reopened under Art. 112a(5), the application will have 
been pending throughout. 
Art. 112a(5) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-3 
If the parent application is withdrawn by the applicant, a divisional 
application can be filed up to (i.e. including) the date on which the 
declaration of withdrawal is received by the EPO. 
While 
proceedings 
are 
stayed 
in 
accordance 
with 
Rule 14(1) 
(see A-IV, 2.2), 
divisional 
applications 
cannot 
be filed. 
Rule 14(1) 
constitutes a lex specialis with regard to the right to file a divisional on a 
pending application provided for in Rule 36(1) (see J 20/05 and G 1/09, 
reasons 3.2.5). 
If a purported divisional application is filed when the parent application is 
not pending, the EPO will issue a communication under Rule 112(1) (see 
A-IV, 1.1). The pendency of the earlier application is not a procedural 
deadline or time limit that would lead to a loss of rights in the event of 
non-compliance. Instead, it is a condition of a substantive nature for the 
filing of divisional applications (see G 1/09, reasons 3.2.3). Therefore, the 
provisions on re-establishment of rights and further processing do not apply 
to the filing of divisional applications (see J 10/01, reasons 15). 
1.1.2 Sequences of divisional applications 
A divisional application can also be an earlier application within the 
meaning of Art. 76(1) for one or more further divisional applications. The 
characterising feature of a sequence of divisional applications, each divided 
out from its predecessor, is that each member of the sequence claims as 
date of filing the date of the root application in which the subject-matter 
divided out in sequences of divisional applications was first disclosed 
(see G 1/05, G 1/06). 
In a sequence of divisional applications, a first-generation divisional 
application is a divisional application based on an application that is not 
itself a divisional application, i.e. the root application. A second-generation 
divisional application is a divisional application based on a first-generation 
divisional application; and so on. 
1.1.3 Persons entitled to file a divisional application 
Only the applicant on record of the earlier application may file a divisional 
application. In the case of multiple applicants, a divisional application may 
only be filed jointly by all applicants on record. This means that, in the case 
of a transfer of an application, a divisional application may only be filed by 
or on behalf of the new applicant(s) if the transfer was duly registered and 
therefore effective vis-à-vis the EPO (Rule 22) at the divisional application's 
date of receipt. A purported divisional application that is not (jointly) filed in 
the name of the applicant(s) of the parent application will not be processed 
as a European divisional application. The EPO will inform applicants by 
issuing a communication under Rule 112(1) (see A-IV, 1.1). 
1.2 Date of filing of a divisional application; claiming priority 
1.2.1 Date of filing 
A European divisional application may be filed in respect of subject-matter 
not extending beyond the content of the parent application as filed. 
Provided this requirement is met, the divisional application is deemed filed 
Art. 76(1), 
2nd sentence 
Part A – Chapter IV-4 

 
on the parent application's filing date and enjoys that application's priority 
(see A-IV, 1.2.2). 
A divisional application filed in due form, i.e. meeting the requirements of 
Art. 80 and Rule 40(1) (see A-II, 4.1 et seq.), is accorded the same filing 
date as the parent application or that of the root application in the case of a 
sequence of divisional applications. Whether the divisional application's 
subject-matter is confined to that of the parent application is not decided 
until the examination procedure (see C-IX, 1.4 et seq.). The term of a 
patent granted for a European divisional application is 20 years from its 
filing date, i.e. the filing date of the root application. 
Since Rule 40(1) does not require a European patent application to contain 
any claims on its filing date, the same applies to a European divisional 
application. The applicant can file the claims after filing the divisional 
application according to the procedures detailed in A-III, 15. This may be 
done after the parent application is no longer pending, provided that the 
requirements of Rule 40(1) were satisfied with regard to the divisional 
application when the parent application was still pending. If the parent 
application's claims are included in the divisional application's description, 
they must be clearly identified as part of the description (see F-IV, 4.4). 
1.2.2 Priority claim of a divisional application 
A priority claimed in the parent application also applies to the divisional 
application, provided that the parent application's priority claim has not 
been lost or withdrawn by the date the divisional application is filed; it is not 
necessary to claim it formally a second time. The priority claim can be 
withdrawn in respect of the divisional application (F-VI, 3.5, E-VIII, 8.2 and 
E-VIII, 8.3). However, this will have no effect on the parent application's 
priority claim. Similarly, any withdrawal of the priority claimed in the parent 
application after the divisional application's filing has no effect on the latter's 
priority claim. 
Where the parent application claims multiple priorities under Art. 88(2), the 
applicant may claim fewer priorities in respect of the divisional application. 
To do so, they must file a clear and unambiguous withdrawal of the priority 
claim or claims in question in respect of the divisional application (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 12 November 2004, OJ EPO 2004, 591). In the 
absence of such a withdrawal, all priorities that have not lapsed in respect 
of the parent application when the divisional is filed also remain valid with 
respect to that application. What is more, all such priority claims remain 
valid for the divisional, even if the applicant provides an incorrect or 
incomplete priority claim when filing it. 
If a certified copy and a translation of the previous application, if applicable 
(see A-VII, 3.3), have been filed in respect of the parent application before 
the divisional application is filed, it is not necessary to file the priority 
document and any translation again in respect of the divisional. The EPO 
makes a copy of these documents and places them in the divisional 
application's file (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, B.2). 
Art. 63(1) 
Art. 80 
Rule 40(1) 
Art. 76(1) 
Rule 53(2) and 
(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-5 
If, when the divisional application is filed, a priority document has not been 
filed in respect of the parent application, it must be filed in respect of the 
divisional application and, if the priority claim of the parent application's 
remaining subject-matter is to be retained, in respect of the parent 
application also. Applicants can also inform the EPO, within the time limit 
set for filing priority documents in the divisional application proceedings, 
that they have meanwhile submitted these documents in respect of the 
parent application. If the divisional application's subject-matter relates only 
to some of the priorities claimed in the parent application, priority 
documents in respect of the divisional application need be filed for those 
priorities only. 
This applies also as regards indicating the file number of the previous 
application. For the time limits for indicating the file number and for filing the 
priority documents, see A-III, 6.5, 6.5.3 and 6.7 et seq. 
1.3 Filing a divisional application 
1.3.1 Where and how to file a divisional application 
A divisional application must be filed with the EPO. It may be filed using 
EPO Online Filing, Online Filing 2.0, the EPO web-form filing service or the 
EPO Contingency Upload Service (see A-II, 1.1.1). If filed by delivery by 
hand, by postal services or by fax, divisional applications must be filed with 
the EPO in Munich, The Hague or Berlin. 
The filing of a European divisional application with a national authority has 
no effect in law; the authority may however, as a courtesy service, forward 
the European divisional application to the EPO. If a competent national 
authority chooses to forward the application, it is not deemed received until 
the documents have reached the EPO. 
The divisional application may be filed by reference to a previously filed 
application. The procedures are as provided for in Rule 40(1)(c), (2) and (3) 
(see A-II, 4.1.3.1). Where the divisional application is filed by reference to 
an international application that has effectively entered the European phase 
(see A-IV, 1.1) and was not filed with the EPO as receiving Office, a 
certified copy of the international application originally filed with the PCT 
receiving Office must be filed (OJ EPO 2009, 486). 
1.3.2 Request for grant 
The request for grant of a patent must contain a statement that a divisional 
application is sought and state the number of the parent application. It 
should also mention which generation of divisional application is being filed 
(Rule 38(4), Art. 2(1), item 1b, RFees). If the request is deficient, as can 
arise if there is no indication that the application constitutes a divisional 
application, even though some of the accompanying documents contain an 
indication to that effect or if the number is missing, the deficiency may be 
corrected in the manner indicated in A-III, 16 or under Rule 139 (see 
A-V, 3). 
Rule 52(2) 
Rule 36(2) 
Rule 35(1) 
Rule 41(2)(e) 
Part A – Chapter IV-6 

 
1.3.3 Language requirements 
As indicated in A-VII, 1.3, a divisional application must be filed in the 
language of the proceedings of the parent application. Alternatively, if the 
earlier (parent) application was filed in a non-official EPO language, the 
divisional application may be filed in the same language. In this case a 
translation into the language of the proceedings of the earlier application 
must then be filed within two months of filing the divisional application 
(see A-III, 14). 
1.3.4 Designation of contracting states 
All contracting states designated in the earlier application at the time of 
filing a European divisional application are deemed designated in the 
divisional application (see also G 4/98). If no designations have been 
withdrawn in respect of the parent application, then all states party to the 
EPC at the date of the parent's filing are automatically designated in the 
divisional application when filed. Conversely, contracting states that have 
had their designation withdrawn in respect of the parent application at the 
time of filing the divisional application, cannot be designated in respect of 
the divisional application. 
If the parent application was filed before 1 April 2009 and the time limit for 
paying the designation fees has not yet expired for the parent application 
when the divisional application is filed, and no designations have been 
withdrawn in respect of the parent application, then all states party to the 
EPC at the parent's filing date are automatically designated in the divisional 
application when it is filed. Conversely, contracting states that have had 
their designation withdrawn or deemed withdrawn in respect of the parent 
application at the time of filing the divisional application, cannot be 
designated in respect of the divisional application. 
The flat designation fee payable for divisional applications filed on or after 
1 April 2009 does not cover contracting states that have had their 
designation withdrawn or deemed withdrawn at the time of filing the 
divisional application. 
1.3.5 Extension and validation states 
All extension and validation states designated in the earlier application at 
the time of filing a European divisional application are deemed designated 
in the divisional application. For more details regarding the designation of 
these states, see A-III, 12.1. 
1.4 Fees 
1.4.1 Filing, search and designation fee(s) 
The filing fee and search fee for the divisional application must be paid 
within one month of filing the European patent application. For the 
additional fee due for any pages in excess of 35, see A-III, 13.2. For the 
additional fee due for divisional applications of second or subsequent 
generations, see A-IV, 1.4.1.1. The designation fee(s) must be paid within 
six months of the date on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the 
publication of the European search report drawn up in respect of the 
divisional application. 
Rule 36(2) 
Art. 76(2) 
Rule 36(4) 
Rule 36(3) and 
(4) 
Art. 79(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-7 
The search fee must be paid even if a further search fee has already been 
paid under Rule 64(1) in respect of the search report on the parent 
application for the part of the application that was lacking in unity and that is 
now the subject of the divisional application (for reimbursement of the 
search fee, see A-IV, 1.8). 
If, within the applicable time limit, the filing, search or designation fees have 
not been paid, the application is deemed withdrawn. The EPO informs the 
applicant of these losses of rights in a communication under Rule 112(1). 
The applicant can request further processing according to Art. 121 and 
Rule 135. 
For divisional applications filed before 1 April 2009, see A-III, 11.3.2 and 
11.3.4 for the deemed withdrawal of single designations or of the 
application and applicable remedies. 
1.4.1.1 Additional fee for divisional applications of second or 
subsequent generations 
An additional fee is payable as part of the filing fee for divisional 
applications of second or subsequent generations filed on or after 
1 April 2014 (see the notice from the EPO dated 8 January 2014, 
OJ EPO 2014, A22). The fee amount varies depending on the generation to 
which 
the 
divisional 
application 
filed 
belongs 
(see A-IV, 1.1.2). 
First-generation divisional applications are not subject to the additional fee. 
The fee amount grows progressively from the second to the fifth generation 
and becomes a flat fee for the fifth and subsequent generations (Art. 2(1), 
item 1b, RFees). 
Example: 
 
In this example, no additional fee would be due in respect of EP2 and EP3, 
as they are first-generation divisional applications. The amount of the 
additional fee for second-generation divisional applications would apply to 
EP4, and the amount for third-generation divisional applications would 
apply to EP5. 
The additional fee is part of the filing fee for divisional applications of 
second and subsequent generations. Therefore, it must be paid within the 
same period as the filing fee, and the same provisions apply if not paid in 
due time (see A-IV, 1.4.1). Likewise, the reduction of the filing fee under the 
Rule 36(3) and 
(4) 
Rule 38 
Art. 2(1), item 1b, 
RFees 
Part A – Chapter IV-8 

 
language arrangements applies to this additional fee, provided that the 
requirements laid down in Rule 6(4) to (7) are complied with (see A-X, 9.2.1 
and 9.2.2). 
1.4.2 Claims fees 
If, at the time of filing the first set of claims, the divisional application 
comprises more than 15 claims, a claims fee is payable in respect of each 
claim in excess of that number (see A-III, 9). Claims fees are payable even 
if they were paid in the parent application in respect of claims relating to the 
subject-matter now the subject of the divisional application (see A-III, 9). 
1.4.3 Renewal fees 
For the divisional application, as for any other European patent application, 
renewal fees are payable to the EPO. They are due in respect of the third 
year and each subsequent year, calculated from the date of filing of the 
earlier (parent) application or that of the root application in the case of a 
sequence of divisional applications. Under Art. 76(1) in conjunction with 
Rule 51(3), the parent application's filing date is also the date from which 
the time limits for paying the renewal fees for the divisional application 
(Art. 86(1)) are calculated. If, when the divisional application is filed, 
renewal fees for the parent application have already fallen due, these must 
also be paid for the divisional application and fall due when the latter is filed 
(see also A-IV, 1.1.1). The period for paying these fees is four months after 
filing the divisional application. If not paid in due time, they may still be 
validly paid within six months of the date on which the divisional application 
was filed, provided that at the same time the additional fee of 50% of the 
renewal fees paid late is paid. 
If, within the four-month period referred to above, a further renewal fee falls 
due or a renewal fee falls due for the first time, it may be paid without an 
additional fee within that period. It may otherwise still be validly paid within 
six months of the due date, provided that at the same time the additional 
fee of 50% of the renewal fee paid late is paid. When calculating the 
additional period the principles developed by the Legal Board of Appeal 
should be applied (see J 4/91). 
Further processing for failure to pay renewal fees on time is ruled out by 
Rule 135(2). However, re-establishment is possible. In the case of 
applications for re-establishment of rights in respect of renewal fees falling 
due on filing of the divisional or within the four-month period laid down in 
Rule 51(3), second sentence, the one-year period prescribed by 
Rule 136(1) starts to run only after the six months under Rule 51(2) have 
expired. 
Rule 45(1) 
Art. 86(1) 
Art. 76(1) 
Rule 51(3) 
Art. 2(1), item 5, 
RFees 
Rule 51(3) 
Art. 2(1), 
item 5, RFees 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-9 
Example: 
25.03.2008: 
date of filing of parent application 
11.01.2011: 
filing of divisional application and due date 
of renewal fee for the third year 
31.03.2011: 
due date of renewal fee for the fourth year 
11.05.2011: 
expiry of four-month period under 
Rule 51(3) 
11.07.2011: 
expiry of six-month period under Rule 51(2) 
in respect of the renewal fee for the third 
year 
30.09.2011: 
expiry of six-month period under Rule 51(2) 
in respect of the renewal fee for the fourth 
year  
11.07.2012: 
expiry of one-year period under 
Rule 136(1) in respect of the renewal fee 
for the third year 
01.10.2012: 
expiry of one-year period under 
Rule 136(1) in respect of the renewal fee 
for the fourth year (extended under 
Rule 134(1)). 
For other examples see A-X, 5.2.4. 
1.5 Designation of the inventor 
The provisions of A-III, 5.4 apply with regard to the designation of the 
inventor, except that, where the designation of the inventor has not been 
provided or is deficient (i.e. it does not comply with Rule 19), the applicant 
will be invited to provide or correct it within a two-month period specified by 
the EPO (see E-VIII, 1.6). The divisional application requires a separate 
designation, independent of the parent application on which it is based. 
1.6 Authorisations 
The provisions of A-VIII, 1.5 and 1.6 apply with regard to authorisations in 
respect of the divisional application. If, according to these provisions, the 
representative has to file an authorisation, they may act on the basis of an 
individual authorisation filed in respect of the parent application only if it 
expressly empowers them to file divisional applications. 
1.7 Other formalities examination 
Other than for matters referred to in A-IV, 1.1 to 1.6, the formal examination 
of divisional applications is carried out as for other applications. The 
provisions of Rule 30 apply with regard to divisional applications relating to 
nucleotide 
or 
amino 
acid 
sequences 
filed 
after 
1 January 1993 
(see A-IV, 5). 
1.8 Search, publication and request for examination of divisional 
applications 
Divisional applications are searched, published and examined in the same 
way as other European patent applications. 
The search fee is refunded if the conditions of Art. 9(2) RFees are met (see 
the decision of the President of the EPO dated 17 January 2023 concerning 
the refund of the search fee under Art. 9(2) RFees, OJ EPO 2023, A4, for 
Rule 60(2) 
Part A – Chapter IV-10 

 
divisional applications for which the search is completed on or after 
1 April 2022). 
The divisional application is published in accordance with Art. 93(1). The 
filing or priority date taken for calculation of the 18-month period for 
publication is the filing date or the earliest priority date claimed 
(see A-IV, 1.2.1). Since this period has usually already expired when the 
divisional application is filed, the technical preparations for publication are 
completed as soon as all formal requirements with respect to the divisional 
application have been fulfilled. The applicant is informed of the intended 
publication date (see also A-VI, 1.1). 
The time limit for filing the request for examination begins to run on the date 
on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the 
search report concerning the divisional application. 
2. 
Art. 61 applications and stay of proceedings under Rule 14 
2.1 General 
Under Art. 61(1), a court or competent authority ("court") may by a final 
decision find that a person other than the registered applicant is entitled to 
the grant of a European patent. Provided that the European patent has not 
yet been granted, this third party may, within three months after the 
decision has become final, in respect of those contracting states 
designated in the European patent application in which the decision has 
been taken or recognised or has to be recognised on the basis of the 
Protocol on Recognition annexed to the European Patent Convention: 
(i) 
prosecute the application as their own application in place of the 
applicant (see A-IV, 2.4 and 2.7) 
(ii) 
file a new European patent application in respect of the same 
invention (see A-IV, 2.5 and 2.7) or 
(iii) 
request that the application be refused (see A-IV, 2.6 and 2.7). 
If the application is no longer pending due to its having been withdrawn, 
refused or being deemed withdrawn, the third party can still file a new 
European patent application in respect of the same invention, in 
accordance with Art. 61(1)(b) (see G 3/92). 
2.2 Stay of proceedings for grant 
If a third party provides proof to the EPO that they have opened 
proceedings against the applicant for the purpose of seeking a judgement 
that they are entitled to the grant of the European patent, the EPO will stay 
the proceedings for grant unless it receives written consent from the third 
party to continue such proceedings. This consent is irrevocable. 
Proceedings for grant may not be stayed before the publication of the 
European patent application. In the case of a Euro-PCT application 
proceedings may only be stayed after expiry of the time limit for entry into 
the European phase. 
Art. 61(1) 
Rule 16 
Art. 61(1)(a) 
Art. 61(1)(b) 
Art. 61(1)(c) 
Rule 14(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-11 
Furthermore, Rule 14(1) only refers to national entitlement proceedings that 
result directly, i.e. generally and automatically, in decisions mentioned in 
Art. 61(1) and not to proceedings initiated before a court of a 
non-contracting state (see J 6/03, r.21). Jurisdiction and the recognition of 
decisions regarding the right to the grant of a European patent for EPC 
contracting states are governed by the Protocol on Recognition, which 
under Art. 164(1) is an integral part of the EPC. Arbitration awards may be 
recognised, provided that they may automatically be recognised by all 
designated contracting states, e.g. in line with the New York Convention on 
the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 
10 June 1958. 
The dates on which proceedings are stayed and resumed will be entered in 
the European Patent Register (Rule 143(1)(s)). They will also be 
communicated to the parties. 
For the stay of opposition proceedings, see D-VII, 4.1. 
2.2.1 Responsible department 
Sole responsibility for procedures where the applicant is not entitled lies 
with the EPO's Legal Division (see the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
2.2.2 Date of the stay of proceedings 
A stay of proceedings under Rule 14(1) takes immediate effect from the 
date the EPO receives satisfactory evidence that national proceedings 
have been instituted against the applicant seeking a decision within the 
meaning of Art. 61(1) (J 9/12). 
The requirements for effectively initiating court proceedings are governed 
by national law (J 7/00). 
2.2.3 Legal nature and effects of the stay 
The stay of proceedings is a unique preliminary procedural measure that is 
justified as a preventive measure to preserve the third party's possible 
rights to the patent in dispute and that takes immediate effect (J 28/94, 
J 15/06). In particular, the stay of the grant proceedings is ordered by a 
communication of the EPO without having heard the applicant. However, 
the applicant may, in view of that communication, request the issue of an 
appealable decision. 
Stay of proceedings implies that the legal status quo existing at the time of 
the suspension is maintained, i.e. neither the EPO nor the parties can 
validly perform any legal acts while proceedings are suspended (J 38/92). 
In particular, the applicant is not allowed to withdraw either the European 
patent application or the designation of any contracting state (Rule 15). 
Likewise, no divisional application can be filed during the stay of 
proceedings (J 20/05 and J 9/12). 
An automatic debit order ceases to be effective on the day a stay of the 
proceedings under Rule 14 takes effect (see point 11.1(c) AAD, Annex A.1 
to the ADA, Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2022). Therefore, after 
Art. 20 
Part A – Chapter IV-12 

 
resumption of proceedings a new automatic debit order must be filed if the 
applicant wishes to continue using the automatic debiting procedure. 
2.2.4 Interruption of time limits 
The time limits in force at the date of stay other than time limits for payment 
of renewal fees are interrupted by such stay. The time that has not yet 
elapsed begins to run from the date on which proceedings are resumed. 
However, the time still to run after the resumption of the proceedings must 
not be less than two months. As for renewal fees, they continue to fall due 
during the period of stay. Also, in accordance with Rule 14(4), the period for 
payment of renewal fee with an additional fee provided for in Rule 51(2) is 
not interrupted. 
Example: The European Patent Bulletin mentions the European search 
report's publication on 15 March 2017. Proceedings are stayed on Friday, 
5 May 2017 and resumed on Friday, 18 August 2017. At the resumption of 
proceedings, the six-month period from the date of the mention of the 
search report's publication for payment of the examination fee (Rule 70(1)) 
does not begin to run again in its entirety but only for the days and months 
not yet elapsed. This time must not be less than two months (Rule 14(4)). 
The six-month period starts on the day following the search report's 
publication, in accordance with Rule 131(2), i.e. on 16 March 2017, and 
ends on 15 September 2017. The period that is already running when 
proceedings are stayed on 5 May 2017 ends on 4 May 2017. 
The period that has elapsed between 15 March 2017 and 4 May 2017 is 
one month and 19 days. The remaining period to run after the resumption is 
more than two months. 
Calculation of the remaining non-elapsed period: 
On the day of suspension, 5 May 2017, the first month of the running period 
has passed and so have 19 days of the second month. Thus, on that day, 
11 days and four months remain (from 5 May 2017 to 15 May 2017 
inclusive and from 15 May 2017 to 15 September 2017 inclusive). This 
non-elapsed period must be added to the date of resumption in order to 
calculate the deadline for payment of the examination fee. 
Resumption is on 18 August 2017. All time limits start running again from 
and including this day (Rule 131(2) does not apply): 
After adding first the remaining days and then the remaining months, it is 
necessary to check whether the last day falls on a day on which the EPO 
receives mail according to Rule 134(1): calculating 11 days from and 
including 18 August 2017 results in 28 August 2017. Adding four months to 
that gives 28 December 2017 as the end of the time limit for payment of the 
fee. Since the EPO was closed from Monday, 25 December 2017 to 
Monday, 1 January 2018, the period is extended to 2 January 2018 in 
accordance with Rule 134(1). 
Rule 14(4) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-13 
2.2.5 Resumption of the proceedings for grant 
The date of resumption of proceedings as well as the legal basis for the 
resumption is to be communicated to the third party and the applicant. 
2.2.5.1 Resumption after final decision in entitlement proceedings 
Grant proceedings will be resumed where evidence is provided that a final 
decision within the meaning of Art. 61(1) has been taken unless a new 
European patent application under Art. 61(1)(b) has been filed for all the 
designated contracting states. If the decision is in favour of the third party, 
the proceedings may not be resumed earlier than three months after the 
decision has become final unless the third party requests the resumption. 
2.2.5.2 Resumption regardless of the stage of entitlement 
proceedings 
The Legal Division may also order the resumption of grant proceedings 
regardless of the stage reached in the proceedings against the applicant. In 
this case, it is at the discretion of the Legal Division to decide whether the 
proceedings are to be continued. This discretion is to be exercised with due 
regard to the interests of the parties. In particular, the outcome of the court 
proceedings in the first instance and the duration of the stay of proceedings 
before the EPO are to be taken into consideration, as well as an evident 
abuse of proceedings, e.g. in the form of delaying tactics. 
2.3 Limitation of the option to withdraw the European patent 
application 
From the time when a third party proves to the EPO that they have initiated 
proceedings concerning entitlement (see A-IV, 2.2) and up to the date on 
which the EPO resumes the proceedings for grant (see A-IV, 2.2.5), neither 
the European patent application nor the designation of any contracting 
state may be withdrawn. 
2.4 Prosecution of the application by a third party 
Any third parties wishing to avail themselves of the possibility open to them 
under Art. 61(1)(a) (see A-IV, 2.1(i)) must declare their intention in writing to 
the EPO in due time. They then take the place of the erstwhile applicant. 
The proceedings for grant are continued from the point reached when they 
were stayed or when the declaration was filed by the third party 
(see A-IV, 2.2). 
2.5 Filing a new application 
A new European patent application under Art. 61(1)(b) must be filed 
electronically or on paper with the EPO in Munich, The Hague, or Berlin. It 
is not possible to file an application according to Art. 61(1)(b) with the 
competent authorities of a contracting state. 
The new application is in many other respects treated as a European 
divisional application and corresponding provisions apply. In particular, the 
following 
provisions 
relating 
to 
divisional 
applications 
apply 
mutatis mutandis: 
(i) 
accordance of the date of filing of the earlier application and 
entitlement to priority date – see A-IV, 1.2; 
Rule 14(3) 
Rule 14(2) 
Rule 14(3) 
Rule 15 
Art. 61(1)(a) 
Art. 61(1)(b) 
Art. 76(1) 
Art. 61(2) 
Part A – Chapter IV-14 

 
(ii) 
information in the request for grant – see A-IV, 1.3.2; 
(iii) 
filing, search, designation and claims fees – see A-IV, 1.4.1 and 
1.4.2; 
(iv) 
designation of inventor – see A-IV, 1.5. 
(v) 
language requirements – see A-IV, 1.3.3. 
However, arrangements for renewal fees are different. For the year in 
which the new application is filed and for the years beforehand, no renewal 
fees are payable. 
In other respects the formal examination is carried out as for other 
applications. 
If it is adjudged that a third party is entitled to the grant of a European 
patent for only some of the contracting states designated in the earlier 
application, and the third party files a new application for these states, the 
earlier application continues to be in the name of the earlier applicant for 
the remaining states. 
The earlier application is deemed withdrawn on the new application's filing 
date for the contracting states originally designated in which the decision 
has been taken or recognised. 
2.6 Refusal of the earlier application 
The EPO must accede to a third-party request under Art. 61(1)(c) to refuse 
the earlier application. The decision is open to appeal (Art. 106(1)). 
2.7 Partial transfer of right by virtue of a final decision 
If by a final decision it is adjudged that a third party is entitled to the grant of 
a European patent in respect of only part of the matter disclosed in the 
European patent application, Art. 61 and Rules 16 and 17 apply to that part. 
3. 
Display at an exhibition 
3.1 Certificate of exhibition; identification of invention 
Where an applicant states when filing an application that the invention 
which is the subject of the application has been displayed at an official or 
officially recognised international exhibition falling within the terms of the 
Convention on international exhibitions, they must file a certificate of 
exhibition within four months of the filing of the European patent 
application. The exhibitions recognised are published in the EPO's Official 
Journal. The certificate must: 
(a) 
have been issued during the exhibition by the authority responsible 
for the protection of industrial property at that exhibition 
(b) 
state that the invention was exhibited at the exhibition 
Rule 17(2) and 
(3) 
Rule 45(1) 
Rule 51(6) 
Rule 17(1) 
Art. 61(1)(c) 
Rule 18(1) 
Art. 55(1)(b) and 
(2) 
Rule 25 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-15 
(c) 
state the opening date of the exhibition and the date of the first 
disclosure, if different from the opening date of the exhibition 
(d) 
be accompanied by an identification of the invention, duly 
authenticated by the above-mentioned authority. 
3.2 Defects in the certificate or the identification 
The Receiving Section acknowledges receipt of the certificate and 
identification of the invention. It draws the applicant's attention to any 
manifest defects in said documents in case it is possible to rectify the 
deficiencies within the four-month period allowed. The applicant is notified 
according to Rule 112(1) if the certificate or identification is not furnished 
within the time allowed. The applicant may request further processing in 
respect of this loss of rights according to Art. 121 and Rule 135. 
4. Applications relating to biological material 
4.1 Biological material; deposit of such 
In accordance with Rule 26(3), "biological material" means any material 
containing genetic information capable of reproducing itself or being 
reproduced in a biological system. 
Where in relation to an application concerning biological material an 
applicant states having deposited in accordance with Rule 31(1)(a) the 
biological material with a depositary institution recognised for the purposes 
of Rules 31 and 34, the applicant must, if such information is not contained 
in the application as filed, submit the name of the depositary institution and 
the accession number of the culture deposit and, where the biological 
material has been deposited by a person other than the applicant, the 
name and address of the depositor, within whichever of the following 
periods is the first to expire: 
(i) 
within 16 months of the European patent application's filing date or 
the priority date, this time limit being deemed to have been met if the 
information is submitted before completion of the technical 
preparations for publication of the European patent application 
(ii) 
if a request for early publication of the application according to 
Art. 93(1)(b) is submitted, up to the date of such submission 
(iii) 
if it is communicated that a right to inspection of the files under 
Art. 128(2) exists, within one month of such communication. 
Further processing is ruled out by Rule 135(2) for the above time limit 
according to Rule 31(2). Nor is Art. 122 applicable because a lack of 
disclosure cannot be remedied by way of re-establishment under Art. 122 
(see the notice from the EPO dated 7 July 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 498). 
Moreover, where the depositor and applicant are not identical, the same 
time limit applies for submitting a document satisfying the EPO that the 
depositor has authorised the applicant to refer to the deposited biological 
material in the application and has given unreserved and irrevocable 
Rule 26(3) 
Rule 31(1)(c) and 
(d) 
Rule 31(2) 
Rule 31(2)(a) 
Rule 31(2)(b) 
Rule 31(2)(c) 
Art. 83 
Rule 31(1)(d) 
Part A – Chapter IV-16 

 
consent to the deposited material being made available to the public in 
accordance with Rule 33(1) and (2) or Rule 32(1). The depositor's 
authorisation for the applicant to refer to the deposit and the consent to the 
material being made available to the public must have existed from the 
filing date of the application in question. For a recommended wording for 
this declaration, see paragraph 3.5 of the above notice. For Euro-PCT 
applications, the document referred to above must be provided to the 
International Bureau before completion of the technical preparations for 
international publication (see the notice from the EPO dated 7 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 498, points II.7 to II.8). 
Note, however, that where the depositor is one of several applicants the 
document referred to in Rule 31(1)(d) is not required (see the above 
notice). 
The depositary institution must be on the list of depositary institutions 
recognised for the purposes of Rules 31 to 34, as published in the EPO's 
Official Journal. This list includes the depositary institutions, especially the 
International Depositary Authorities under the Budapest Treaty. An 
up-to-date list is regularly published in the EPO's Official Journal. 
The applicant is strongly recommended to file the deposit receipt issued by 
the depositary institution with the EPO since this document indicates, in 
particular, the depositor and shows the information required under 
Rule 31(1)(a) and (c). This information enables the EPO to certify any 
requests to issue a sample (see A-IV, 4.2 and A-IV, 4.4) and the examining 
division to establish whether the application satisfies the requirements 
under Art. 83 (see also F-III, 6.2 and F-III, 6.3). A deposit receipt must be 
filed for each sample of biological material disclosed in the application and 
deposited under the Budapest Treaty for the purposes of Rule 31. The 
deposit receipt may be filed as long as proceedings before the EPO are 
pending. 
4.1.1 New deposit of biological material 
If biological material deposited according to Rule 31 ceases to be available 
from the recognised depositary institution, an interruption in availability shall 
be deemed not to have occurred if: 
(i) 
a new deposit of that material is made in accordance with the 
Budapest Treaty 
(ii) 
a copy of the receipt of that new deposit issued by the depositary 
institution is forwarded to the EPO within four months of the date of 
the new deposit, stating the number of the European patent 
application or patent. 
The non-availability may occur because, for example: 
(a) 
the material has degraded such that it is no longer viable 
Rule 33(6) 
Rule 34 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-17 
(b) 
the authority with which the original deposit was made no longer 
qualifies for that kind of material, either under the Budapest Treaty or 
under bilateral agreements with the EPO. 
In either case (a) or (b) above, a new deposit must be made within three 
months of the depositor's being notified of the non-availability of the 
organism by the depositary institution (Art. 4(1)(d) Budapest Treaty). This is 
subject to the exception where: 
– 
the non-availability of the deposit is for the above reason (b) and 
– 
the depositor does not receive the above notification from the 
depositary institution within six months of the date on which it is 
published by the International Bureau that the depositary institution is 
no longer qualified in respect of the biological material in question. 
In this exceptional case, the new deposit must be made within three 
months of the date of the said publication by the International Bureau 
(Art. 4(1)(e) Budapest Treaty). 
If, however, the original deposit was not made under the Budapest Treaty 
but rather at a depositary institution recognised by the EPO by virtue of a 
bilateral agreement, the above-mentioned six-month period is calculated 
from the date when the EPO publishes the fact that the depositary 
institution is no longer qualified to accept deposits of the biological material 
in question under that bilateral agreement. 
4.1.2 Application filed by reference to a previously filed application 
Where the application was filed by reference to a previously filed 
application in accordance with the procedures described in A-II, 4.1.3.1 and 
the 
previously 
filed 
application 
referenced 
already 
satisfied 
the 
requirements of Rule 31(1)(b) and (c) on its filing date, these requirements 
will also be satisfied in respect of the European patent application. 
If the information on the deposited biological material present in the 
previously filed application as filed does not satisfy Rule 31(1)(c), the EPO 
will not know this until the applicant files the certified copy and any required 
translation of the previously filed application (at the latest within two months 
of the filing date – Rule 40(3)). Even where the certified copy and any 
translation required are filed up to two months from the filing date, if the 
requirements of Rule 31(1)(c) are not satisfied, the time limit for rectification 
of this deficiency according to Rule 31(2) is unaffected (see A-IV, 4.2). 
4.2 Missing information; notification 
When the Receiving Section notices that the information required under 
Rule 31(1)(c) (indication of the depositary institution and accession number 
of the culture deposit) or the information and the document referred to in 
Rule 31(1)(d) (authorisation to refer to the deposit and consent to it being 
made available) is not contained in or has not yet been submitted with the 
application, it should notify the applicant of this fact, as this information can 
only be validly submitted within the time limits specified in Rule 31(2). In the 
case of missing information under Rule 31(1)(c), the deposit must be 
Art. 97(2) 
Rule 31 
Art. 83 
Part A – Chapter IV-18 

 
identified in the patent application as filed in such a way that the accession 
number submitted later can be traced back without ambiguity. This can 
normally be done by indicating the identification reference given by the 
depositor within the meaning of Rule 6.1(a)(iv) of the Budapest Treaty 
(see G 2/93). Where the depositary institution and/or the accession number 
is/are missing in the application on the date of filing but the applicant 
provides the information within the applicable time limit (Rule 31(2)), the 
missing information about the depositary institution and/or the accession 
number is published on the front page of the published European patent 
application (see A-VI, 1.3). 
The applicant is also informed when a deposit with a recognised depositary 
institution is referred to but no depositary institution receipt has been filed 
(the applicant is advised to provide this receipt when filing the application, if 
possible 
– see 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
7 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 498). Filing the receipt is essential for identifying the 
depositor, whose name needs to be established before the EPO can certify 
a third party's request for the issue of a sample of the deposited material 
(see also A-IV, 4.1). Any further action, i.e. establishing whether the 
information available satisfies the sufficiency-of-disclosure requirement, is a 
matter for the examining division. See also F-III, 6, in particular F-III, 6.3(ii), 
as regards the examining division's treatment of applications relating to 
biological material. If the examining division is of the opinion that the 
invention is not sufficiently disclosed due to a lack of information 
concerning the biological material that constitutes the subject of the 
invention, it may refuse the European patent application (see F-III, 3). 
Further processing is ruled out by Rule 135(2) for the time limit according to 
Rule 31(2) for supplying the information required by Rule 31(1)(c) and (d). 
4.3 Availability of deposited biological material to expert only 
Under Rule 32(1)(a) and (b), until the date on which the technical 
preparations for publication of the application are deemed complete, the 
applicant may inform the EPO that, until the publication of the mention of 
the grant of the European patent or, where applicable, for 20 years from the 
filing date if the application has been refused or withdrawn or is deemed 
withdrawn, the availability referred to in Rule 33 is to be effected only by the 
issue of a sample to an independent expert nominated by the requester. 
The above communication must take the form of a written declaration 
addressed to the EPO. This declaration may not be contained in the 
description and the claims of the European patent application but may be 
given in the appropriate section of the request for grant form 
(EPO Form 1001). 
If the declaration is admissible, it is mentioned on the front page when the 
European patent application is published (see also A-VI, 1.3). 
For Euro-PCT applications published in the international phase in an official 
EPO language, the applicant must request the expert solution from the 
International Bureau before completion of the technical preparations for 
international publication, preferably using Form PCT/RO/134 (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 7 July 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 498). For Euro-PCT 
Rule 32(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-19 
applications not published in the international phase in an official EPO 
language, the applicant may request the expert solution under Rule 32(1) 
before completion of the technical preparations for publication of the 
translation of the international application required under Rule 159(1)(a) 
(see the above notice). 
If the applicant duly informs the EPO under Rule 32(1), the biological 
material is issued only to an independent expert nominated by the 
requester. The requirements and obligations applying to experts are laid 
down by the EPO President and are deemed fulfilled by signing the 
relevant declaration on a dedicated EPO form (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 10 July 2017, OJ EPO 2017, A60, and the 
notice from the EPO dated 10 July 2017, OJ EPO 2017, A61). Expert 
nominations must be accompanied by a declaration whereby the experts 
undertake to comply with the pertinent requirements and obligations and 
confirm that they know of no circumstances that might give rise to justified 
doubts as to their independence or that might conflict in any other way with 
their function as expert. 
4.4 Requests for samples of biological material 
From the date of publication of a European patent application relating to 
biological material, the biological material deposited in accordance with 
Rule 31 will be made available on request to any person having the right to 
inspect the files (see A-XI, 1). Such availability will be effected by issuing a 
sample to the person making the request or, where the applicant has so 
requested, to an expert nominated by the requester (see A-IV, 4.3). The 
EPO makes available on its website the forms to be used for obtaining 
samples of biological material deposited under the Budapest Treaty and 
that the EPO is asked to certify under Rule 33(4). 
The EPO's certification of the request signals to the depositary institution 
that, based on its verification of the status of the application/patent and the 
related data in the EPO records, it may issue a sample of the biological 
material to the requester or the expert, as applicable. The EPO is exempted 
from verifying and assessing the expert's suitability and independence 
(OJ EPO 2017, A60). 
After certification, the EPO will send the request to the depositary institution 
and copies to the applicant or proprietor of the European patent and to the 
certified party. It is up to the certified party to pay the fees requested by the 
recognised depositary institution direct to them. 
5. Applications relating to nucleotide and amino acid sequences 
If nucleotide and amino acid sequences within the meaning of Rule 30(1) 
are disclosed in the European patent application, they are to be 
represented in a sequence listing that complies with WIPO Standard ST.26. 
WIPO Standard ST.26 is a worldwide standard that, in Annex VII, contains 
recommendations on how to prevent potential added or deleted 
subject-matter in sequence listings due to conversion from WIPO 
Standard ST.25 to WIPO Standard ST.26. The EPO relies on these 
recommendations as guidance for examination. Each nucleotide or amino 
acid sequence extending over the minimum length as defined in the 
Rule 32(2) 
Rule 33 
Rule 57(j) 
Rule 30(1) 
Rule 30(2) 
Art. 123(2) 
Part A – Chapter IV-20 

 
standard and disclosed in the application documents (including drawings) 
needs to be listed in the sequence listing, even if the sequence is only a 
fragment of another disclosed sequence. The sequence listing must be filed 
in electronic form, i.e. in XML format as required under WIPO 
Standard ST.26, using EPO Forms 1001E, 1200E or 1038E, which are 
available in EPO Online Filing and Online Filing 2.0, or on an electronic 
data carrier (see A-II, 1.1.1 and OJ EPO 2023, A48). The sequence listing 
must not be filed on paper or in PDF format. Regarding divisional 
applications, see A-IV, 5.4. Nonetheless, if two or more sequence listings 
are filed on the filing date, only the standard-compliant sequence listing will 
be used as the basis for the search. See the decision of the President of 
the EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A96, and the notice from 
the EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A97, as well as the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 24 April 2023, OJ EPO 2023, 
A46, and the notice from the EPO dated 24 April 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A47. 
Where a sequence listing is filed or corrected after the filing date, the 
applicant is required to submit a statement that it does not include matter 
going beyond the content of the application as filed. Standard-compliant 
sequence listings filed subsequent to the filing date, i.e. in reply to the 
invitation under Rule 30(3), are not part of the description and, therefore, 
not published with the European patent application. Whenever a sequence 
listing that is part of the description is corrected or amended, a complete 
new sequence listing must be filed. The corrected or amended sequence 
listing must comply with the applicable WIPO standard, which depends on 
the application's date of filing. For applications filed on or after 1 July 2022, 
sequence listings must comply with WIPO Standard ST.26. For applications 
filed before that date, the sequence listing must comply with WIPO 
Standard ST.25. 
For applications referring to sequences belonging to the prior art, 
see F-II, 6.1. 
The Receiving Section will inform the applicant of any deficiencies as to the 
sequence listing or as to the necessary statement and issue an invitation to 
remedy the deficiencies and pay a late furnishing fee within a 
non-extendable period of two months. The late furnishing fee compensates 
for the administrative efforts of issuing the communication under Rule 30(3) 
and delaying the transmission of the application to the search division until 
after availability of a standard-compliant sequence listing. The late 
furnishing fee therefore does not have to be paid if the standard-compliant 
sequence listing is filed after the filing date but before the Receiving 
Section has issued the communication under Rule 30(3). If the 
requirements of Rule 30 in conjunction with the decision of the President of 
the EPO dated 9 December 2021 are not complied with in due time, where 
appropriate following the invitation to do so from the Receiving Section, 
which includes the payment of the late furnishing fee, the application will be 
refused according to Rule 30(3). This also applies if a sequence listing is 
subsequently filed in the required electronic format but still contains 
deficiencies with respect to the WIPO standard. Such deficiencies will not 
prompt the EPO to issue another invitation under Rule 30(3) triggering a 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 30(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-21 
new period of two months unless the previous invitation did not draw the 
applicant's attention to such remaining deficiencies (see J 7/11). 
The applicant may request further processing of the application (see 
E-VIII, 2). 
5.1 Sequence information filed under Rule 56 
The possibility of filing a sequence listing as a missing part of the 
description is, as a rule, very rare. The principle of Rule 56 is that it must be 
obvious from the application documents as filed that part of the description 
appears to be missing (see A-II, 5.1). Very few cases fulfil the conditions for 
parts of the description being missing in the form of a sequence listing. 
Rule 56, for example, is applicable where the description quotes sequence 
identifier numbers (SEQ ID Nos.) but the sequences are not further 
disclosed in the description. Although in such a case the disclosure is 
missing in the form of a sequence listing, the Receiving Section is not 
expected to identify such omissions as qualifying for Rule 56, and 
according to Rule 56(1) the applicant may not invoke the omission of a 
communication under Rule 56(1) or (2). However, applicants may file the 
missing parts of the description relating to sequences on their own initiative 
within two months of the filing date according to Rule 56(2) (see A-II, 5.2).  
According to Rule 57(j), any late-filed sequence information will be checked 
for compliance with Rule 30(1) in conjunction with the rules laid down by 
the EPO President. 
If the late-filed sequence information or sequence listing does not conform 
to the above requirements, then the communication under Rule 30(3) is 
sent to the applicant (see A-IV, 5). 
If, on the other hand, the late-filed sequence information includes a 
standard-compliant sequence listing according to the requirements of 
Rule 30(1), no Rule 30(3) communication will be sent. In such a case the 
late furnishing fee under Rule 30(3) does not fall due. 
The above applies regardless of whether the late-filed parts of the 
description result in a change of the filing date (see A-II, 5.3) or if the 
late-filed missing parts can be based on the claimed priority, allowing the 
original filing date to be maintained (see A-II, 5.4). If, however, the late-filed 
parts of the description result in a change of the filing date, any 
communication according to Rule 30(3) which might be required will only be 
sent after the one-month period for the withdrawal of the late-filed parts has 
expired without the applicant having withdrawn them (see A-II, 5.5). 
In the case where the applicant inserts a sequence listing into the 
description as a late-filed part of the description according to Rule 56, the 
sequence listing so added, whether standard-compliant or not, is 
considered part of the description on the filing date (regardless of whether 
this has changed) and, consequently, is published with the European 
patent application. 
Art. 121 
Rule 135 
Part A – Chapter IV-22 

 
The rare possibility to file a sequence listing as a late-filed missing part 
must, however, be clearly differentiated from those cases where the 
application as filed contains: 
– 
the complete sequence information in the body of the description but 
no standard-compliant sequence listing 
– 
a sequence listing that does not contain all sequences disclosed in 
the application documents 
– 
a sequence listing that does not comply with the applicable WIPO 
standard. 
In such cases, Rule 30 applies and the applicant will be invited under 
Rule 30(3) to file a standard-compliant sequence listing. 
5.2 Sequence information filed under Rule 56a 
Erroneously filed sequence listings may be corrected under Rule 56a 
(see A-II, 6). 
5.3 Sequence listings of an application filed by reference to a 
previously filed application 
Where the application is filed by reference to a previously filed application 
(see A-II, 4.1.3.1), and that previously filed application contained sequence 
listings on its filing date, then those sequence listings form part of the 
application as originally filed. This is subject to the exception that, where 
the sequences only appear in the claims and not in the description or 
drawings of the previously filed application, and the applicant did not 
include the claims of the previously filed application in the reference, then 
those sequences are not included in the European patent application as 
originally filed and a sequence listing must be filed separately. If in such a 
case the sequence listing is filed on the European patent application's filing 
date, it is published with the European patent application. 
A sequence listing complying with the applicable WIPO standard and filed 
in the previously filed application after the filing date is not part of the 
description (Rule 30(2)) and, therefore, not included in the reference to the 
description and any drawings under Rule 40(1)(c). Consequently, the 
applicant must file a standard-compliant sequence listing for the European 
patent application separately. 
Where the previously filed application is not available to the EPO, it will not 
be possible to carry out the check according to Rule 57(j) on the 
compliance of the sequence listing with Rule 30(1) until the applicant files 
the certified copy and any translation required, which must be done within 
two months of the filing date (Rule 40(3)). If, after receipt of the certified 
copy and translation, where applicable, the examination by the Receiving 
Section reveals that the sequence listing contained does not comply with 
Rule 30(1) in conjunction with the rules laid down by the EPO President, 
the EPO will send a communication according to Rule 30(3) inviting the 
applicant to correct any deficiencies and pay the late furnishing fee 
(see A-IV, 5). 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-23 
If the previously filed application referred to is a European patent 
application or an international application filed with the EPO as receiving 
Office, and the sequence listing contained satisfied the requirements of 
Rule 30 or Rule 5.2 PCT on its date of filing then all the requirements of 
Rule 30(1) are satisfied automatically on the filing date of the European 
patent application filed by reference to this application. If the sequence 
listing of the previously filed application does not comply with WIPO 
Standard ST.26, for instance because it was filed before the entry into force 
of the new WIPO standard, an invitation will be issued under Rule 30(3) to 
submit a standard-compliant sequence listing. 
If the previously filed application was filed with any other office, the 
applicant will have to ensure that all the requirements of Rule 30(1), in 
conjunction with the rules laid down by the EPO President, are met. In 
particular, 
the 
applicant 
must 
consider 
that 
any 
electronic 
standard-compliant sequence listing filed on the filing date of the previously 
filed application will in most cases not be part of the certified copy under 
Rule 40(3) issued by the filing office: due to technical limitations, the 
certified copy received by the EPO will in most cases contain a converted 
sequence listing that is not standard-compliant. Hence, the applicant will 
still have to provide a standard-compliant sequence listing to the EPO to 
satisfy the above requirements. The same applies where the previously 
filed application was a European patent application or an international 
application filed with the EPO as receiving Office, but where one or more of 
the elements required to satisfy the requirements of Rule 30(1) or 
Rule 5.2 PCT in conjunction with WIPO Standard ST.26 were not present 
on the filing date. If this is not the case, the procedure in A-IV, 5 will be 
followed (a communication under Rule 30(3) will be sent). 
In alignment with the practice for divisional applications, a sequence listing 
in WIPO Standard ST.25 format contained in the certified copy under 
Rule 40(3) (e.g. converted from the TXT file available to the issuing office) 
is excluded from the calculation of the additional fee for pages in excess of 
35 (see also A-IV, 5.4 and A-III, 13.2). 
5.4 Sequence listings of a divisional application 
As an independent European patent application, a divisional application 
must also satisfy the requirements of Rule 30 in conjunction with the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 9 December 2021 concerning 
the 
filing 
of 
sequence 
listings, 
OJ EPO 2021, 
A96 
(see G 1/05, 
reasons 3.1). Without prejudice to the requirements of Art. 76(1), second 
sentence, if a sequence listing is to form part of the description of the 
divisional application, it must be submitted together with the other 
documents making up the divisional application unless reference is made to 
a previously filed application containing a sequence listing as part of the 
application (Rule 40(1)(c)). Where the sequence listing of the parent 
application is in a format complying with WIPO Standard ST.25, it must be 
converted into one complying with WIPO Standard ST.26. To avoid the 
potential risk of adding and/or losing subject-matter due to conversion, 
applicants may additionally file the parent application's ST.25 sequence 
listing in PDF format as part of the divisional application. In such cases, the 
pages of the ST.25 sequence listing are excluded from the calculation of 
Part A – Chapter IV-24 

 
the additional fee for pages in excess of 35 ("page fee"). The same practice 
applies to divisional applications filed by reference where the certified copy 
(Rule 40(3)) contains a sequence listing in ST.25 format (see also A-IV, 5.3 
and A-III, 13.2). In order to comply with Rule 30(1), the sequence listing in 
WIPO Standard ST.26 format must in such cases be filed subsequently 
(see OJ EPO 2023, A98). The late furnishing fee under Rule 30(3) does not 
fall due if the ST.26 sequence listing is filed before the EPO issues the 
communication under Rule 30(3) (see A-IV, 5). 
An applicant who has filed a WIPO Standard ST.26-compliant sequence 
listing under Rule 30 with regard to the earlier application (parent 
application) is exempted from having to submit said sequence listing if it is 
intended to be used for search purposes only (i.e. not as part of the 
description) in respect of the divisional application (the relevant check box 
for this is preselected in section 38.3 on Form 1001). This enables the EPO 
to add a copy of the standard-compliant sequence listing filed for the earlier 
(parent) application to the dossier of the divisional application in XML 
format and for search purposes only (see OJ EPO 2021, A97, point 18). 
However, since the content of the disclosure of the invention is the 
responsibility of the applicant, any sequence listing that is to form part of 
the description must be filed by them. The sequence listing of the earlier 
application is, thus, not automatically added to the dossier of the divisional 
application if 
– 
the applicant files a WIPO Standard ST.26-compliant sequence 
listing as part of the divisional application's description 
– 
the sequence listing available in the earlier application does not 
comply with WIPO Standard ST.26. 
6. 
Conversion into a national application 
The central industrial property office of a contracting state must apply the 
procedure for the grant of a national patent or another protective right 
provided for by the legislation of that state at the request of the applicant for 
or the proprietor of the European patent under the circumstances specified 
in Art. 135(1). If the request for conversion is not filed within the 
three-month period specified in Rule 155(1), the effect referred to in Art. 66 
will lapse (i.e. the European patent application will cease to be equivalent to 
a regular national filing in the designated contracting states). 
The request for conversion is to be made to the EPO, except where the 
application is deemed withdrawn under Art. 77(3); in this case the request 
is filed with the central industrial property office with which the application 
was filed. That office will, subject to national security provisions, transmit 
the request direct to the central industrial property offices of the contracting 
states specified in it, together with a copy of the file relating to the 
European patent application. If the central industrial property office with 
which the application was filed does not transmit the request before the 
expiry of 20 months from the filing date, or if claimed, from the priority date, 
then Art. 135(4) applies (i.e. the effect of Art. 66 lapses). 
Art. 135 
Art. 135(2) 
Rule 155(2) and 
(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter IV-25 
If a request for conversion is filed with the EPO, it must specify the 
contracting states in which the application of national procedures is desired 
and be accompanied by a conversion fee. In the absence of the fee the 
applicant or proprietor is notified that the request will not be deemed filed 
until the fee is paid. The EPO transmits the request to the central industrial 
property offices of the specified contracting states accompanied by a copy 
of the files relating to the European patent application or patent. 
Art. 135(3) 
Rule 155(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter V-1 
Chapter V – Communications concerning formal 
deficiencies; amendment of application; 
correction of errors 
1. Communications concerning formal deficiencies 
Where an application is found to be formally deficient during a formalities 
examination, the Receiving Section or, where appropriate, the examining 
division issues one or more communications to the applicant identifying all 
the particular EPC requirements not met and, in the case of deficiencies 
that can be corrected, inviting the applicant to correct them within specified 
periods (see A-III, 16). In the exceptional case of communications that do 
not detail all deficiencies, see A-III, 16.1. The applicant will be notified of 
the consequences, e.g. application deemed withdrawn, priority right lost, 
that result from the deficiencies or failure to take appropriate action within 
due time. 
In general, depending on the deficiency in question, either: 
(i) 
a time limit will be specified by the EPO, subject to Rule 132, for 
meeting the objection, e.g. an invitation to supply the priority 
document or priority file number under Rule 59 or 
(ii) 
a fixed time limit will apply, e.g. two months for correcting 
deficiencies under Rule 58. 
For further details see E-VIII, 1. If a deficiency is not rectified in due time, 
then the legal effects that are envisaged will apply. 
2. Amendment of application 
2.1 Filing of amendments 
Prior to receiving the European search report, the applicant may amend the 
application only if invited by the Receiving Section to remedy particular 
deficiencies, including when no claims are present in the application as 
originally filed. In this case, the applicant must rectify this deficiency by 
filing a set of claims in response to a communication according to Rule 58 
(see A-III, 15). In the period between receiving the European search report 
and a first communication from the examining division, i.e. also when the 
application may still be with the Receiving Section, applicants may of their 
own volition amend the description, claims and drawings (Rule 137(2)). 
Where a search opinion accompanies the search report under Rule 62(1), 
the applicant must respond to it by filing observations and/or amendments 
(see B-XI, 8 for details and exceptions to this requirement). However, the 
European patent application may not be amended in such a way that it 
contains subject-matter extending beyond the content of the application as 
filed (regarding the publication of claims thus amended in response to the 
European search report under Rule 137(2), see also A-VI, 1.3). 
2.2 Examination of amendments as to formalities 
The Receiving Section examines amendments, filed before the receipt of 
the search report, for formal requirements. Such amendments must remedy 
Rule 58 
Rule 137(1) and 
(2) 
Art. 123(1) and 
(2) 
Rule 68(4) 
Rule 58 
Rule 137(1) 
Part A – Chapter V-2 

 
the deficiencies notified by the Receiving Section. The description, claims 
and drawings may be amended only to the extent sufficient to remedy the 
disclosed deficiencies, which makes it necessary for the Receiving Section 
to compare any amended description, claims and drawings with those 
originally filed. Where, for example, a fresh description is filed to replace an 
earlier description that was objected to on account of non-compliance with 
the physical requirements, the Receiving Section must compare both 
descriptions, and the objection is not met until the wording is identical. 
However, identity of wording with the application documents as originally 
filed is not a requirement for amendments rectifying the following 
deficiencies: 
(i) 
filing at least one claim according to Rule 58, where no claims 
existed on filing (see A-III, 15) (these claims must still satisfy the 
requirements of Art. 123(2), but this check is carried out by the 
search and examining divisions) 
(ii) 
the filing of missing parts of the description or missing drawings 
according to Rule 56 (see A-II, 5). 
Amendments that extend beyond the remedying of deficiencies and that 
are filed prior to receipt of the search report may be taken into 
consideration in the subsequent procedure, provided that on receipt of the 
search report the applicants declare that they wish them to be maintained. 
Examination as to formalities of amendments filed after the receipt of the 
search report and before the application is transferred to the examining 
division is the responsibility of the Receiving Section. 
The procedure for effecting amendments is dealt with in H-III, 2. 
3. 
Correction of errors in documents filed with the EPO 
Linguistic errors, errors of transcription and mistakes in any document filed 
with the EPO may be corrected on request under Rule 139, first sentence. 
Requests for such corrections may be made at any time, provided that 
proceedings are pending before the EPO (see J 42/92). However, if the 
error to be corrected concerns items that third parties might expect to be 
able to take at face value and whose correction would jeopardise their 
rights, the request for correction must be filed as soon as possible, and at 
least in time for incorporation in the publication of the European patent 
application. With regard to correction of priority claims, specific provisions 
apply with a view to protecting the interests of third parties and allow the 
applicant to correct priority claims and lay down a time limit for doing so 
(see Rule 52(3) and A-III, 6.5.2). This ensures that corrected priority 
information is available when the application is published. The applicant 
can only correct the priority claim after this date, in particular after 
publication of the application, under certain limited circumstances where it 
is apparent on the face of the published application that a mistake has been 
made. See J 2/92, J 3/91 and J 6/91 as well as J 11/92 and J 7/94. Each of 
these decisions indicated situations under EPC 1973 where the requester 
could correct priority data even though it was too late for a warning to be 
published 
with 
the 
application. 
These 
same 
situations 
apply 
Rule 139, 
1st sentence 
 

Part A – Chapter V-3 
mutatis mutandis under EPC 2000 to the acceptance of requests to correct 
priority claims after the end of the time limit according to Rule 52(3). 
Regarding correction of the date indicated for the previous filing, see also 
A-III, 6.6. 
After expiry of the two-month time limit for correcting erroneous (parts) of 
the application documents under Rule 56a(1) or 56a(3) (see A-II, 6), the 
correction of errors in application documents is governed by Rule 139, 
second sentence. The allowability of such corrections under Rule 139 is 
subject to strict requirements. 
If the error is in the description, claims or drawings, the correction must be 
obvious in the sense that it is immediately evident that nothing else could 
have been intended than what is offered as the correction. Such a 
correction may be effected only within the limits of what a skilled person 
would derive directly and unambiguously, using common general 
knowledge, and seen objectively and relative to the date of filing, from all of 
the documents as filed (see G 3/89 and G 11/91; see also H-VI, 2.2.1). The 
documents to be considered in assessing whether the correction is 
allowable are those of the application as originally filed, including any 
late-filed missing parts of the description or missing drawings filed 
according to Rule 56, or application documents or parts corrected 
according to Rule 56a, regardless of whether this resulted in a change of 
the filing date (see A-II, 5 et seq and A-II, 6 et seq). However, claims filed 
after the filing date in response to an invitation according to Rule 58 
(see A-III, 15) cannot be used in assessing the allowability of the request. 
It is not allowable under Rule 139 to replace the complete set of application 
documents (i.e. description, claims and drawings) with other documents 
that the applicant had intended to file with the request for grant 
(see G 2/95). 
The examining division decides on the request for correction. If such a 
request is pending before termination of the technical preparations for 
publication, a reference to it is published on the front page. 
In the case of electronic filing of European patent applications, the technical 
documents (description, claims, abstract and drawings) may be attached in 
their original format, provided it is one listed in the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A48. Under this decision, 
these technical documents may also be attached in a format other than 
those listed, provided that on filing the application the applicant informs the 
EPO where it can reasonably acquire the corresponding software. If, on the 
filing date, the documents making up the European patent application are 
available both in the format provided by the Online Filing software and in 
another admissible format in accordance with the above decision, the 
documents in the latter format can also be used to determine whether a 
request for correction of the description, claims or drawings is allowable. 
Rule 56a 
Rule 139, 
2nd sentence 
 

Part A – Chapter VI-1 
Chapter VI – Publication of application; request 
for examination and transmission of the dossier 
to examining division 
1. Publication of application 
1.1 Date of publication 
The application is published as soon as possible after the expiry of a period 
of 18 months from the filing date or, where priority is claimed, from the 
earliest priority date. Upon request from the applicant, the application may, 
however, be published before that date, provided that the filing and search 
fees have been validly paid and there are no formal deficiencies in the 
application documents (see A-III, 1.1 and 16). Deficiencies not yet 
remedied concerning the designation of inventor are not a bar to early 
publication (see A-III, 5.4 and J 1/10). If the application is ready for grant 
before expiry of the 18-month period, see C-IV, 7.1 and C-VI, 3. 
If the applicant abandons the priority date, the publication is deferred, 
provided that the EPO receives the abandonment notification before the 
technical preparations for publication are completed. These preparations 
are considered completed at the end of the day that comes five weeks 
before expiry of the 18th month following the earliest date of priority if 
priority is claimed, or following the filing date if the priority is abandoned or 
no priority is claimed (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, D.1). The applicant is 
informed about the termination of the preparations, the publication number 
and intended publication date. Where the priority abandonment notification 
is received after that time, publication, if not already completed, takes place 
as if the priority date applied, although a notice as to the abandonment of 
the priority will appear in the European Patent Bulletin (see F-VI, 3.5). The 
same procedure is followed when the priority right is lost under Art. 90(5) 
(see A-III, 6.10). 
1.2 No publication; preventing publication 
The application is not published if it has been finally refused or deemed 
withdrawn or withdrawn before the technical preparations for publication 
are completed (see A-VI, 1.1). These preparations are considered 
completed at the end of the day that comes five weeks before expiry of the 
18th month following the filing or priority date (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, 
OJ EPO 2007, D.1). The application is, however, published if, upon 
termination of the preparations, a request for a decision under Rule 112(2) 
has been received but no final decision has yet been taken (see 
OJ EPO 1990, 455) or if there is a pending request for re-establishment of 
rights under Art. 122 and Rule 136(1). 
If, after termination of the preparations, the application is withdrawn, 
non-publication cannot be guaranteed. However, the EPO will endeavour 
(in accordance with the principles of J 5/81) to prevent publication on a 
case-by-case basis if the stage reached in the publication procedure 
Art. 93(1) 
Rule 67(2) 
Part A – Chapter VI-2 

 
permits this without undue effort (see the notice from the EPO dated 
25 April 2006, OJ EPO 2006, 406). 
The application may be withdrawn by means of a signed declaration, which 
should be unqualified and unambiguous (see J 11/80). EPO Form 1018, 
which can be downloaded free of charge from epo.org, ensures that the 
declaration is unambiguous (also in respect of any conditions for 
withdrawal). It is therefore highly recommended to use it for withdrawing the 
European patent application (see also the notice from the EPO dated 
12 August 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A79). The applicant is bound by an 
effective declaration of withdrawal (see C-V, 11) but may make it subject to 
the proviso that the content of the application not be made known to the 
public. This takes into account the procedural peculiarity that the applicant 
making the declaration of withdrawal in the five weeks before the date of 
publication cannot know whether publication can still be prevented. 
However, neither the application nor the designation of a contracting state 
may be withdrawn from the time a third party proves that they have initiated 
entitlement proceedings and up to the date on which the EPO resumes the 
proceedings for grant (see also E-VIII, 8). 
1.3 Content of the publication 
The publication must contain the description, the claims and any drawings 
as filed, including any sequence listing filed on the filing date and any 
late-filed missing parts of the description or missing drawings filed 
according to Rule 56(2) or (3) (see A-II, 5) or any correct (parts of the) 
application documents according to Rule 56a(3) or (4) (see A-II, 6 and the 
notice from the EPO dated 23 June 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A71). Where 
correct (parts of the) application documents are included under 
Rule 56a(4), the publication also contains the erroneous (parts of the) 
application documents – clearly marked as erroneously filed – as the 
application as filed. Where the procedure under Rule 56 or 56a is not 
finalised when the technical preparations for publication are terminated, a 
correction of the publication will be initiated as soon as the filing date and 
content of the application are finally determined. The publication will also 
specify, where possible, the person(s) designated as the inventor(s). If the 
claims were filed after the filing date according to the procedures explained 
in A-III, 15, this will be indicated when the application is published 
(Rule 68(4)). 
The publication also indicates as designated contracting states all states 
party to the EPC on the date the application was filed unless individual 
states have been withdrawn by the applicant before the termination of the 
technical preparations for publication. When a European patent application 
filed before 1 April 2009 is published, the states for which protection is 
actually sought may not yet be known because the time limit under 
Rule 39(1) for paying the designation fees is still running. Those definitively 
designated – through actual payment of designation fees – are announced 
later in the European Patent Register and the European Patent Bulletin 
(see Information from the EPO, OJ EPO 1997, 479). For European 
divisional applications, see A-IV, 1.3.4. 
Rule 15 
Rule 68(1), (3) 
and (4) 
Rule 20 
Rule 32(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter VI-3 
The publication also contains any new or amended claims filed by the 
applicant under Rule 137(2), together with the European search report and 
the abstract determined by the search division if both are available before 
the technical preparations for publication are terminated. Otherwise the 
abstract filed by the applicant is published. The search opinion is not 
published with the European search report (Rule 62(2)), though it is open to 
file inspection (see A-XI, 2.1). If the EPO has received a communication 
from the applicant under Rule 32(1) ("expert solution"), this too must be 
mentioned 
(see 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
7 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 498). Further data may be included at the discretion of the 
EPO President. 
With the exception of documents that have to be translated, originals of 
documents filed are used for publication purposes where they meet the 
physical requirements referred to in A-VIII, 2; otherwise, the amended or 
replacement documents meeting these requirements are used. Application 
documents that are of such bad quality that any improvement would result 
in an extension of the subject-matter as originally filed are published as 
filed. Prohibited matter may be omitted from the documents before 
publication, the place and number of words or drawings omitted being 
indicated (see A-III, 8.1 and A-III, 8.2). Documents incorporated in an 
electronic file are deemed to be originals (Rule 147(3)). 
If a request for correction under Rule 139 of errors in the documents filed 
with the EPO is allowed, it must be incorporated in the publication. If, upon 
termination of the technical preparations for publication, a decision is still 
pending on a request for correction of items that third parties might expect 
to be able to take at face value and whose correction would jeopardise their 
rights, this must be mentioned on the front page of the publication (see the 
case law in A-V, 3), as must a request for correction of errors in the 
description, claims or drawings (see A-V, 3). 
The correction of errors occurring in the course of the European patent 
application's publication can be requested at any time (see H-VI, 3). 
Complete republication of the application will take place where appropriate. 
1.4 Publication in electronic form only 
All European patent applications, European search reports and European 
patent specifications are published in electronic form only, on a publication 
server (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, 
Special 
edition 
No. 3, 
OJ EPO 2007, D.3, 
and 
OJ EPO 2005, 126) 
accessible via the EPO website (epo.org). 
1.5 Separate publication of the European search report 
If not published with the application, the European search report is 
published separately (also electronically). 
Rule 68(2) and 
(4) 
Rule 66 
Rule 139 
Part A – Chapter VI-4 

 
2. 
Request for examination and transmission of the dossier to the 
examining division 
2.1 Communication 
The Receiving Section communicates to the applicant the date on which 
the European Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the European 
search report and draws attention to the provisions with regard to the 
request for examination as set out in Art. 94(1) and (2) and Rule 70(1). In 
the unlikely event that the communication wrongly specifies a later date 
than the date of the publication's mention, the later date is decisive as 
regards the time limit for filing the request for examination (see A-VI, 2.2 
and C-II, 1) and also for responding to the search opinion (see B-XI, 8 and 
A-VI, 3) unless the error is obvious. In the communication, the applicant is 
also informed that the designation fee(s) must be paid within six months of 
the date on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the search 
report's publication (see A-III, 11.2 and 11.3). 
Where the time limit under Rule 70(1) is that within which the applicant 
must reply to the search opinion (i.e. where Rule 70(2) does not apply), the 
invitation under Rule 70a(1) is sent in a combined communication with the 
communication according to Rule 69(1) (see C-II, 3.3). 
2.2 Time limit for filing the request for examination 
The request for examination may be filed by the applicant up to the end of 
six months after the date on which the European Patent Bulletin mentions 
the European search report's publication. The request for examination is 
not deemed filed until the examination fee has been paid (see C-II, 1). If the 
applicant does not file the request for examination and pay the examination 
fee within the above time limit, then the procedure explained in A-VI, 2.3 
applies. 
The mandatory request for grant form (EPO Form 1001) contains a written 
request for examination. To confirm the written request, the applicant only 
needs to pay the examination fee within the time limit under Rule 70(1). 
Applicants may also pay the examination fee as from the filing date and 
prior to receipt of the European search report. In that case, the Receiving 
Section invites them under Rule 70(2) to indicate within six months of the 
date of the mention of the search report's publication in the European 
Patent Bulletin whether they wish to proceed further with their application 
(see C-II, 1.1). If, after receipt of the European search report, the applicant 
decides not to pursue the application and does not react to the invitation 
under Rule 70(2), the application will be deemed withdrawn under 
Rule 70(3), and the examination fee will be refunded in its entirety 
(see A-VI, 2.5). 
If the applicant has filed an automatic debit order, the examination fee will 
normally be debited at the end of the six-month period. For cases in which 
the applicant wishes the application to be transmitted earlier to the 
examining division, see the AAD in Annex A.1 of Supplementary 
publication 3, OJ EPO 2022. 
Rule 69(1) and 
(2) 
Rule 70a(1) 
Art. 94(1) and 
(2) 
Rule 70(1) 
Art. 78(1)(a) 
Rule 41(1) 
Art. 11(a) RFees 
Point 5.1(c) AAD 
 

Part A – Chapter VI-5 
The request for examination may not be withdrawn. 
Regarding 
Euro-PCT 
applications 
entering 
the 
European 
phase, 
see E-IX, 2.1.4 and E-IX, 2.5.2. 
2.3 Legal remedy 
If the request for examination is not validly filed by paying the examination 
fee before expiry of the period under Rule 70(1), the application is deemed 
withdrawn and the applicant is notified accordingly. In response to this 
loss-of-rights communication, the applicant can request further processing 
in accordance with Art. 121 and Rule 135 (see E-VIII, 2). 
If the applicants have validly filed a request for examination before the 
European search report has been transmitted to them, the Receiving 
Section invites them according to Rule 70(2) to indicate within six months of 
the date of the mention of the search report's publication in the European 
Patent Bulletin whether they wish to proceed further with their application. If 
they fail to respond to this request in time, the application is deemed 
withdrawn and the applicants are notified accordingly. In this case, the 
applicants may also avail themselves of the legal remedy under Art. 121 
and 
Rule 135 (further processing of the application). Regarding 
reimbursement of the examination fee, see A-VI, 2.2 and A-X, 10.2.3. 
C-VI, 3 describes the procedure in respect of a categorical request for 
examination, as provided for in Rule 10(4), where the applicant waives the 
right to the communication according to Rule 70(2). 
Regarding Euro-PCT applications entering the regional phase, see 
E-IX, 2.1.3 and E-IX 2.5.2. 
2.4 Transmission of the dossier to the examining division 
If the Receiving Section finds that the request for examination was filed in 
due time, or the wish to proceed further with the application was indicated 
in due time (Rule 70(2)), it transmits the application to the examining 
division. Otherwise, it will notify the applicant of the loss of rights that has 
occurred (see Rule 112(1)). 
The dossier as transmitted to the examining division contains the following: 
(i) 
all documents filed in relation to the application, including priority 
documents, translations and any amendments 
(ii) 
any certificate filed in relation to display at an exhibition (see A-IV, 3) 
and any information furnished under Rule 31 if the application relates 
to biological material (see A-IV, 4) 
(iii) 
the European search report, if applicable the search opinion, the 
content of the abstract as drawn up by the search division and the 
internal search note, if any 
(iv) 
documents cited in the search report and publication document(s) 
Rule 70(1) 
Art. 94(2) 
Rule 112(1) 
Rule 70(2) and 
(3) 
Rule 112(1) 
Art. 121 
Art. 16 
Art. 18(1) 
Rule 10 
Part A – Chapter VI-6 

 
(v) 
the applicant's response to the search opinion (see B-XI, 8) or to the 
WO-ISA, supplementary international search report or IPER 
prepared by the EPO (see E-IX, 3.2 and E-IX, 3.3.4) 
(vi) 
all relevant correspondence. 
The Receiving Section will direct attention to any aspects of the application 
requiring urgent attention by the examining division, e.g. any letters that 
have to be answered before the application is examined in its proper turn. 
2.5 Refund of examination fee 
The examination fee is refunded: 
(i) 
in full if the European patent application is withdrawn, refused or 
deemed withdrawn before substantive examination has begun 
(Art. 11(a) RFees) 
(ii) 
at a rate of 50% if the European patent application is withdrawn after 
substantive examination has begun and 
– 
before expiry of the (extended) time limit for replying to the first 
invitation under Art. 94(3) issued by the examining division 
proper or 
– 
if no such invitation has been issued, before the date of the 
communication under Rule 71(3) (Art. 11(b) RFees). 
As concerns (i) above, this applies to all European patent applications that 
are withdrawn, refused or deemed withdrawn on or after 1 July 2016. As 
concerns (ii) above, this applies to all European patent applications for 
which substantive examination began on or after 1 November 2016 (see 
the Administrative Council decision of 29 June 2016, OJ EPO 2016, A48). 
Communications under Art. 94(3) "issued by the examining division proper" 
(see also C-III, 4) are all communications indicating that the application 
does not meet the requirements of the EPC and referring to deemed 
withdrawal under Art. 94(4) if the deficiencies are not duly remedied. These 
include the following:  
– 
minutes of consultations by phone or in person, accompanied by an 
invitation to remedy deficiencies 
– 
communications relating to the "completely contained" criterion under 
Rule 56(3) or 56a(4) 
– 
summonses to oral proceedings under Rule 115(1) to which a 
communication complying with the requirements of Art. 94(3) and 
Rule 71(1) is annexed.  
In contrast, communications addressing purely formal deficiencies and 
issued by formalities officers as part of the duties entrusted to them, even if 
issued on the basis of Art. 94(3), do not constitute communications under 
Art. 11 RFees 
 

Part A – Chapter VI-7 
Art. 94(3) 
"issued 
by 
the 
examining 
division 
proper". 
Likewise, 
communications issued by the examining division proper on some other 
legal basis, such as Rule 164(2)(a), Rule 53(3) or Art. 124, have no bearing 
on the period for a withdrawal qualifying for the 50% refund (see the notice 
from the EPO dated 30 June 2016, OJ EPO 2016, A49). 
An applicant unsure whether substantive examination has begun and 
wanting to withdraw the application only if certain to receive the 100% 
refund may make withdrawal contingent upon the refund ("conditional" 
withdrawal). The date of the start of examination (C-IV, 7.1) is indicated by 
means of EPO Form 2095 in the public part of the dossier and is thus open 
to file inspection in the European Patent Register after the patent 
application's publication. If EPO Form 2095 is not on file, substantive 
examination is deemed to have started on the date on which the first 
communication from the examining division proper is issued (e.g. a 
communication under Art. 94(3), Rule 71(3) or any other legal basis as 
mentioned above). Before publication, the applicant can request the 
relevant information from the EPO or access it electronically via the MyEPO 
Portfolio and My Files services. For more details, see OJ EPO 2013, 153, 
and OJ EPO 2023, A89. 
2.6 Reduction in examination fee 
Where applicants having their residence or principal place of business 
within the territory of a contracting state having an official language other 
than English, French or German and nationals of that state who are 
resident abroad make use of the options provided for under Art. 14(4), the 
examination fee is reduced under certain circumstances (Rule 6(3) to (7) in 
conjunction with Art. 14(1) RFees) (see A-X, 9.2.1 and 9.2.3). 
3. Response to the search opinion 
The applicant is required to respond to the search opinion within the time 
limit under Rule 70(1) or, if a communication under Rule 70(2) is sent 
(see C-II, 1.1), within the time limit under Rule 70(2). If the applicant fails to 
respond to the search opinion on time, the application is deemed withdrawn 
(Rule 70a(3)). For more details, see B-XI, 8. 
Art. 14(4) 
Rule 6 
Art. 14(1) RFees 
Rule 70a 
 

Part A – Chapter VII-1 
Chapter VII – Languages 
1. Admissible languages on filing 
1.1 General 
European patent applications can be filed in any language. However, if filed 
in a language other than an official EPO language (English, French and 
German), a translation into one of the official languages must be filed within 
two months of the date of filing (Rule 6(1)). Although filing in any language 
is in principle possible, there may be limitations due to the applicable 
national law for applications filed at a central industrial property office or the 
competent national authority under Art. 75(1)(b). 
In the case of applications filed in "an admissible non-EPO language" (see 
A-VII, 3.2), a reduction of the filing fee is allowed for certain categories of 
applicants (see A-X, 9.2.1 and A-X, 9.2.2). 
Filing a European patent application in a single language is not a 
requirement for according a filing date (Art. 90(3) in conjunction with 
Art. 14(2)). However, where an application is filed in more than one 
language, the EPO will invite the applicant to remedy the deficiency. 
1.2 Filing by reference 
Where the description is filed by reference to a previously filed application 
(see A-II, 4.1.3.1) and the latter is not in an official EPO language, the 
applicant must also file a translation into one such language within two 
months of the filing date. 
1.3 European divisional applications; Art. 61 applications 
European divisional applications must be filed in the language of the 
proceedings of the earlier (parent) application. Alternatively, if the earlier 
(parent) application was not in an official EPO language, the divisional 
application may be filed in the language of the earlier (parent) application. 
In this case a translation into the language of the proceedings of the earlier 
application must be filed within two months of the filing of the divisional 
application. 
The same applies to the filing of a new European patent application under 
Art. 61(1)(b). 
1.4 Invitation to file the translation 
Where the translation is not filed in due time, the EPO will invite the 
applicant to rectify this deficiency within a non-extendable period of two 
months. Failure to file the translation in time in response to this invitation 
results in the application being deemed withdrawn under Art. 14(2), in 
which case further processing is ruled out (see A-III, 14). 
2. Language of the proceedings 
The official EPO language (English, French or German) in which the 
application is filed, or into which it is subsequently translated, constitutes 
the "language of the proceedings". Where the EPO invites the applicant to 
file the translation (see A-VII, 1.4), the invitation will be sent by default in 
Art. 14(1) and 
Art. 14(2) 
Rule 6(1) 
Rule 6(3) to (7) 
Rule 40(3) 
Rule 36(2) 
Art. 61(2) 
Art. 90(3) 
Rules 57 and 58 
Art. 14(3) 
Part A – Chapter VII-2 

 
English with an update to the language of the proceedings on receipt of the 
translation, if applicable. 
The language of the proceedings is the only language used by EPO 
departments in written proceedings on that application (see G 4/08). 
Where European patent applications are filed in one of the official EPO 
languages, or after they have been translated into one of them, the 
description, claims and drawings can only be amended in that official 
language, which is the language of the proceedings. 
Any claims filed after the filing date will need to be filed in the language of 
the proceedings. 
Example: If an application is filed without claims in Japanese and is then 
translated into English, the claims will need to be filed in English. 
Subsequent amendments to the application will also have to the filed in 
English. 
3. 
Derogations from the language of the proceedings in written 
proceedings 
3.1 Parties' written submissions 
With the exception of amendments to the European patent application or 
European patent, any party may use any of the EPO's three official 
languages in written proceedings before the EPO. 
3.2 Admissible non-EPO languages 
Natural or legal persons having their residence or principal place of 
business within an EPC contracting state having a language other than 
English, French or German as an official language, and nationals of that 
state resident abroad, may file documents that have to be filed within a time 
limit in an official language of that state ("admissible non-EPO language"). 
For example, an Italian or Swiss applicant may file a reply in Italian to a 
communication from the examining division issued under Art. 94(3). 
A translation of a document filed in an admissible non-EPO language into 
an official language of the EPO must be filed within a non-extendable 
period of one month (Rule 6(2)). However, if the document is a notice of 
opposition or appeal or a petition for review (Art. 112a), the period extends 
to the end of the opposition or appeal period or the period for petition for 
review, if this expires later. The translation can be into any of the EPO's 
official languages, regardless of the language of the proceedings. 
3.3 Priority document 
Where the certified copy of the previous application whose priority is 
claimed (priority document) is not in an official EPO language, a translation 
into one such language need only be filed at the invitation of the EPO. This 
invitation is issued only where the validity of the priority claim is relevant to 
determining the patentability of the invention concerned. The translation 
may be replaced by a declaration that the European patent application is a 
complete translation of the previous invention. 
Rule 3(2) 
Rule 3(1) 
Art. 14(3) and 
Art. 14(4) 
Rule 6(2) 
Rule 53(3) 
 

Part A – Chapter VII-3 
See A-III, 6.8 for more information on the translation of priority documents. 
3.4 Documents filed as evidence 
Documents to be used as evidence may be filed in any language. This 
applies to all proceedings before the EPO and, especially, to publications 
(for instance, an extract from a Korean periodical cited by an opponent to 
show lack of novelty or lack of inventive step). However, the department 
dealing with the case may require a translation of the document or relevant 
parts of it in one of the official EPO languages, to be chosen by the person 
filing the document. If the document is filed by the applicant in pre-grant 
proceedings, the EPO should require a translation of the document or 
relevant parts of it unless the examiners are fully competent in the 
language concerned. In opposition proceedings the same principles apply, 
taking into account the interests of all parties. The time limit for filing the 
translation will be specified by the competent EPO department on a 
case-by-case basis and will depend on the language concerned and the 
length of the document or relevant parts, taking account of the provisions of 
Rule 132 (see E-VIII, 1.2). If the required translation is not filed in due time, 
the EPO may disregard the document in question. 
3.5 Third-party observations 
Third-party observations (E-VI, 3) must be filed in writing and in one of the 
EPO's official languages. Supporting documents, e.g. prior-art citations, can 
be written in any language. 
If the third-party observations and/or prior art are not in an official EPO 
language (Art. 14(1)), the EPO may invite the third party, if identifiable, to 
submit a translation of the observations and, where appropriate, of the cited 
prior art in one such language within a period according to Rule 132. 
4. Derogations from the language of the proceedings in oral 
proceedings 
This subject is dealt with in E-V. 
5. Documents filed in the wrong language 
Documents making up the European patent application can only be filed in 
the wrong language on the occasion of its amendment, since the 
application can originally be filed in any language (see A-VII, 1.1). In such a 
case, as well as if any other document is not filed in the prescribed 
language or any required translation is not filed in due time, the document 
is deemed not filed. The person who has filed the document will be notified 
accordingly by the EPO. Even though deemed not filed, the document 
concerned will become part of the file and therefore accessible to the public 
according to Art. 128(4). 
In the event of failure to file a translation of the filed documentary evidence 
upon invitation in due time, the documents in question may be disregarded 
by the EPO. 
Where submissions accompanying the performance of a procedural act 
subject to a time limit (e.g. filing the designation of the inventor, filing a 
certified copy of the earlier application for which priority is claimed or filing 
Rule 3(3) 
Rule 114(1) 
Rule 4 
Art. 14(1) 
Rule 3(3) 
Part A – Chapter VII-4 

 
the translation of the priority document under Rule 53(3)) are not filed in an 
official EPO language, they will be included in the file without note being 
taken of their content. 
Observations by third parties and notices of oppositions will be 
communicated to the applicant or the patent proprietor even if they are 
deemed not filed. 
6. 
Languages of publication 
European patent applications are published only in the language of the 
proceedings, whereas European patent specifications are published in the 
language of the proceedings together with translations of the claims in the 
other two official languages. 
7. 
Correction and certification of the translation 
Any error in the translation filed can be corrected at any time during 
proceedings before the EPO, i.e. during pre-grant proceedings and also 
during opposition proceedings, bringing the translation into conformity with 
the application as filed in the original language (e.g. with the originally filed 
Japanese-language application). This applies similarly to translations filed 
for Euro-PCT applications upon entry into the European phase (see 
E-IX, 2.1.2). However, correction of the translation during opposition 
proceedings will not be allowed if it contravenes Art. 123(3), i.e. if it implies 
an amendment of the claims that extends the protection conferred. 
Unless evidence is provided to the contrary, the EPO will assume, for the 
purposes of determining whether the subject-matter of the European patent 
application or European patent extends beyond the content of the 
application as filed (Art. 123(2)), that the translation filed under Art. 14(2) or 
Rule 40(3) is in conformity with the original text of the application (e.g. in 
Japanese). The text of the application as filed however remains the basis 
for determining the allowability of amendments under Art. 123(2) or the 
content of the disclosure for the purposes of Art. 54(3) (see G-IV, 5.1). 
The EPO has the discretion to require the filing of a certificate that a 
translation supplied corresponds to the original text, within a period to be 
specified (see E-VIII, 1.2 and E-VIII, 1.6). An invitation to file the certificate 
may only be made where the EPO has serious doubts as to the accuracy of 
the translation. Failure to file the certificate in due time will lead to the 
document being deemed not received unless the EPC provides otherwise. 
Further processing is possible according to Art. 121 and Rule 135. 
As a rule, certification is not required in respect of the translations of the 
claims in the other two official languages required under Rule 71(3). 
8. 
Authentic text of the application or patent 
The text of an application or patent in the language of the proceedings is 
the authentic text. It therefore follows that the translation of the claims of 
the patent specification required by Art. 14(6) is for information only. 
Rules 79(1) 
and 114(2) 
Art. 14(5) and (6) 
Art. 14(2) 
Rule 7 
Art. 70(2) 
Rule 5 
Art. 70(1) 
Art. 14(8) 
 

Part A – Chapter VIII-1 
Chapter VIII – Common provisions 
1. Representation 
1.1 General principles 
Subject to the next sentence, no person may be compelled to be 
represented by a professional representative in proceedings before the 
EPO; this holds for all parties to such proceedings, e.g. applicants, 
proprietors, opponents. A party (natural or legal person) who has neither 
residence nor principal place of business in a contracting state must be 
represented by a professional representative; the party must act through a 
professional representative in all proceedings other than in filing the 
application (which includes all acts leading to the accordance of a date of 
filing) or initiating the European phase within the applicable time limit (see 
E-IX, 2.3.1). To "be represented" is to be interpreted as meaning due 
representation, including not only notice of the appointment of a 
professional representative but also, where applicable, the filing of 
authorisations of the appointed representative (see A-VIII, 1.6). 
Parties having their residence or principal place of business in a contracting 
state may also act direct before the EPO, even if they have appointed a 
professional representative (see A-VIII, 1.2), an employee (see A-VIII, 1.3) 
or a legal practitioner (see A-VIII, 1.5) to act on their behalf. When 
conflicting instructions are received from parties and their representative, 
each will be advised of the other's action. 
Should opponents who are party to proceedings and do not have either 
residence or principal place of business within the territory of one of the 
contracting states fail to meet the requirement set out under Art. 133(2) in 
the course of the opposition procedure (e.g. the representative withdraws 
from the opposition case or is deleted from the list of professional 
representatives), they are requested to appoint a new representative. 
Irrespective of whether they do so, the EPO will nevertheless inform 
opponents of the date and location of any oral proceedings and point out 
that if they appear alone they will not be entitled to act before the division. 
1.2 Representation by a professional representative; list of 
professional representatives; associations 
Representation of natural or legal persons in proceedings before the EPO 
may only be undertaken by professional representatives whose names 
appear on a list kept for this purpose by the EPO. See, however, also 
A-VIII, 1.5. The Legal Division has sole responsibility for entries and 
deletions in the list of professional representatives (see Art. 20(1) and the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 
2013, 600). A group of at least two professional representatives registered 
with the EPO as an association within the meaning of Rule 152(11) may be 
appointed collectively to represent a party under that name (see OJ EPO 
2013, 535). In that case, each member of the association may perform 
procedural acts on behalf of the party, while correspondence from the EPO, 
according to Rule 130, is addressed to the association rather than one 
particular member. Parties are recommended to clearly specify whether 
they wish to appoint the association or an individual representative 
Art. 133(1) and 
Art. 133(2) 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 152 
Art. 134(1), 
Rule 152(11) 
Part A – Chapter VIII-2 

 
belonging to that association (see also A-VIII, 1.7). The Legal Division is 
responsible for the registration of associations (OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
1.3 Representation by an employee 
Parties having their residence or principal place of business in a contracting 
state are not obliged to be represented by a professional representative in 
proceedings before the EPO. They may, irrespective of whether they are 
legal or natural persons, act through an employee, who need not be a 
professional representative but who must always file an authorisation (see 
A-VIII, 1.6 and A-VIII, 1.7).  
1.4 Common representative 
Joint applicants, joint proprietors of patents and more than one person 
giving joint notice of opposition or intervention may act through a common 
representative. If the request for the grant of a European patent, the notice 
of opposition or the request for intervention does not name a common 
representative, the party first named in the relevant document will be 
considered the common representative. The common representative can 
thus be a legal person. However, if one of the parties is obliged to appoint a 
professional representative and has done so, this representative will be 
considered the common representative acting on behalf of all parties. In 
such a case, no other party can act as common representative. However, if 
the first named party in the document has appointed a professional 
representative, that representative will be considered to be acting on behalf 
of all parties. 
If the European patent application or patent is transferred to more than one 
person, and such persons have not appointed a common representative, 
the preceding provisions will apply. If such application is not possible, the 
EPO will require the parties to appoint a common representative within a 
two-month period specified by the EPO (see E-VIII, 1.6). If this request is 
not complied with, the EPO will appoint the common representative 
(J 10/96). 
In the case of joint applicants for whom a change of representative is 
requested, any authorisation must be signed by all applicants. If this is not 
the case, the parties will likewise be invited to appoint a common 
representative before registration can take place. 
For Rule 151 to apply, each party or their duly authorised representative 
must have signed the document (request for grant, notice of opposition, 
etc.) giving rise to their participation (see also A-III, 4.2.2 and A-VIII, 3.2 
and 3.4). Otherwise the party cannot take part in the proceedings, nor 
therefore be represented by a common representative. 
1.5 Representation by a legal practitioner 
Representation in proceedings under the EPC may also be undertaken in 
the same way as by a professional representative (see A-VIII, 1.2) by any 
legal practitioner qualified in one of the contracting states and having their 
place of business within such state, to the extent that they are entitled, 
within the said state, to act as a professional representative in patent 
matters. Legal practitioners entitled to act as representatives before the 
Art. 133(3) 
Art. 134(1) 
Rule 152 
Art. 133(4) 
Rule 151(1) and (2) 
Art. 134(1) and 
Art. 134(8) 
 

Part A – Chapter VIII-3 
EPO are not entered on the list of professional representatives (see 
J 18/99). However, they are registered in an internal database administered 
by the Legal Division (see OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
1.6 Signed authorisation 
Representatives acting before the EPO must, on request, file a signed 
authorisation (see A-VIII, 3.2) within a two-month period specified by the 
EPO (see E-VIII, 1.6). Both individual and general authorisations (see 
A-VIII, 1.7) within the meaning of Rule 152(4) serve the same purpose. For 
general authorisations, the indication of the registration number is 
equivalent to the filing of the authorisation itself. The filing of an 
authorisation is distinct from the appointment of a representative for a 
specific case. If the requirements of Art. 133(2) are not fulfilled, the same 
period will be specified for the communication of the appointment and, 
where applicable, for the filing of the authorisation. 
Professional representatives who identify themselves as such will be 
required to file a signed authorisation only in certain cases, in particular if 
there is a change of representative (see Art. 1(2) of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, 
OJ EPO 2007, L.1). No authorisation is required where a professional 
representative other than the appointed one (and not being a member of 
the same association or law firm) performs a procedural act on behalf of a 
party to proceedings, e.g. filing a reply to the communication under 
Rule 71(3), provided that it is apparent from the submission that they are 
acting at the request of that party without the intention to take over 
representation. In case of doubt as to a professional representative's 
entitlement to act on behalf of a party, the EPO may require the filing of an 
authorisation (see Art. 1(3) of the above decision). 
However, a legal practitioner entitled to act as a professional representative 
in accordance with Art. 134(8) or an employee acting for an applicant in 
accordance with Art. 133(3), first sentence, but who is not a professional 
representative, must always file a signed authorisation (see Art. 2 and 
Art. 3 of the above decision) to be in a position to validly perform procedural 
acts. In Euro-PCT proceedings, persons representing applicants in these 
capacities are not required to file signed authorisations if they have already 
filed an authorisation expressly covering proceedings established by the 
EPC with the EPO as receiving Office, ISA or IPEA. Where a 
representative is appointed to act on behalf of the applicant in several of 
that party's applications, it is not necessary to file an individual authorisation 
for each application (see A-VIII, 2.4). A clear indication of the applications 
concerned is sufficient; the EPO will make sure that a copy of the 
authorisation is included in all of the files concerned. 
The authorisation can also be filed by the applicant. This also applies 
where the applicant is obliged to be represented, as fulfilling the 
requirement to be represented is not itself a procedural step under 
Art. 133(2) to which the rule of obligatory representation applies. 
An association of representatives can be authorised to represent a party 
before the EPO within the meaning of Art. 134(1) (Rule 152(11)). A party 
Rule 152 
Part A – Chapter VIII-4 

 
appointing several representatives can authorise them collectively as an 
association instead of having to do so individually, provided that the 
association in question is registered with the EPO (OJ EPO 2013, 535). 
Where invited to file an authorisation by way of an exception, a reference to 
that registration number in the authorisation will suffice. 
An authorisation remains in force until its termination is communicated to 
the EPO. Transfer of representation or termination of authorisation can, 
subject 
to 
certain 
conditions, 
be 
effected 
electronically 
by 
the 
representative using the My Files service (see the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 26 April 2012, OJ EPO 2012, 352). The authorisation will 
not terminate upon the death of the person who gave it unless the 
authorisation provides to the contrary (Rule 152(9)). 
1.7 General authorisation 
An authorisation may cover more than one application or patent. Also, a 
general authorisation enabling a representative to act in respect of all the 
patent transactions of the party making the authorisation may be filed. 
However, an authorisation given for EP proceedings (EPO Form 1004) 
does not extend to UP proceedings unless this is indicated by selecting the 
corresponding box on EPO Form 1004. Alternatively, a separate general 
authorisation solely for UP proceedings may be used (EPO Form 7004). A 
corresponding procedure applies to the withdrawal of an authorisation. 
However, the filing of a general authorisation is distinct from the 
appointment of a representative for a specific case. The party granting a 
general authorisation is not bound to appoint one of the representatives 
listed in any specific procedure before the EPO. Nor does a general 
authorisation allow the EPO to assume, without any additional information, 
that a person listed should be appointed as a representative in a specific 
case (see J 17/98). Therefore, in a specific case, a party wishing to appoint 
the representative(s) listed in a general authorisation must notify the EPO 
accordingly by referring to the general authorisation number already 
registered. The Legal Division is responsible for the registration of general 
authorisations (OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
1.8 Invitation to file authorisation and legal consequence in case of 
non-compliance 
Where the appointment of a legal practitioner entitled to act as professional 
representative in accordance with Art. 134(8), or an employee acting for an 
applicant in accordance with Art. 133(3), first sentence, but who is not a 
professional representative, is communicated to the EPO without an 
authorisation being filed, the representative is invited to file the 
authorisation 
within 
a 
two-month 
period specified 
by 
the 
EPO 
(see E-VIII, 1.6). Where a party having neither residence nor principal place 
of business within a contracting state has failed to fulfil the requirements of 
Art. 133(2) (see A-VIII, 1.1), the invitation will be sent direct to the party 
concerned. The same period will be specified for the communication of the 
appointment and, where applicable, the filing of the authorisation. The 
period may be extended in accordance with Rule 132 on request by the 
representative or party as the case may be (see E-VIII, 1.6). If such 
authorisation is not filed in due time, any procedural steps taken by the 
Art. 133(2) 
Rule 152(2), (4), (7), 
(8) and (9) 
Rule 152(2) and 
(6) 
Rule 132 
 

Part A – Chapter VIII-5 
representative other than filing a European patent application or initiating 
the European phase within the applicable time limit (see E-IX, 2.3.1) will, 
without prejudice to any other legal consequences provided for in the EPC, 
be deemed not taken. The party is informed accordingly. 
2. Form of documents 
2.1 Documents making up the European patent application 
The physical requirements that the documents making up the European 
patent application, i.e. request, description, claims, drawings and abstract, 
must satisfy are set out in Rule 49(2) in conjunction with the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113). In 
particular, when amending the application documents, amendments must 
be typed. Any submissions containing handwritten amendments to 
application documents – unless they involve graphic symbols and 
characters and chemical and mathematical formulae – are a formal 
deficiency (see Art. 2(7) of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
25 November 2022 and 50(1)). The EPO President may lay down further 
special formal or technical requirements for the filing of documents, in 
particular with regard to the filing of documents by means of electronic 
communication (Rule 2(1)). Notes on the preparation of OCR-readable 
patent applications are published in OJ EPO 1993, 59. The particular 
requirements relating to drawings are dealt with in A-IX. 
2.2 Replacement documents and translations 
Replacement documents and translations in an official language of 
documents filed under the provisions of Art. 14(2) or Rule 40(3) are subject 
to the same requirements as the documents making up the application. 
2.3 Other documents 
Documents other than those referred to in the previous paragraphs should 
be typewritten or printed with a left margin of about 2.5 cm on each page 
(Art. 3 
of 
the 
decision 
of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113). 
2.4 Number of copies 
Documents relating to more than one application or patent (e.g. individual 
or general authorisation) or having to be communicated to more than one 
party, only need to be filed in one copy (see also A-VIII, 1.5). However, in 
the case of letters accompanying submitted documents (in particular EPO 
Form 1038), a separate copy must be filed for each file to which the 
document they accompany relates. 
For example, where two different applications share a common priority 
claim, the applicant only needs to file one copy of the priority document, but 
this must be accompanied by two different letters each relating to one or 
the other application (preferably two copies of EPO Form 1038). Each letter 
(or EPO Form 1038) must be duly signed and indicate one or the other of 
the two application numbers in respect of which the priority document is 
being filed (see also A-VIII, 3.1). 
Rule 49(1) 
Rule 50(1) 
Rule 50(2) 
Part A – Chapter VIII-6 

 
2.5 Filing of subsequent documents 
After a European patent application has been filed, the documents referred 
to in Rule 50 may be filed by delivery by hand, by postal services (see A-II, 
1.2) or by means of electronic communication (see A-II, 1.1). These include 
filing electronically by means of EPO Online Filing, Online Filing 2.0, the 
EPO web-form filing service, the EPO Contingency Upload Service or, for 
certain procedural actions, MyEPO Portfolio (see A-II, 1.1.1) and by fax 
(see A-II, 1.1.2). Authorisations are, however, excluded from filing by fax or 
using the EPO web-form filing service. Priority documents are excluded 
from filing by fax, using the EPO web-form filing service or the EPO 
Contingency Upload Service. For the means of filing accepted for priority 
documents, see A-III, 6.7. 
The EPO web-form filing service must not be used to file any documents in 
respect of opposition, limitation and revocation proceedings as well as 
appeal proceedings and proceedings for review by the Enlarged Board of 
Appeal (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 3 May 2023, 
OJ EPO 2023, A48). 
If subsequent documents relating to European patent applications are filed 
by fax, written confirmation reproducing the contents of those documents 
and complying with the requirements of the Implementing Regulations to 
the EPC must be supplied on invitation from the EPO within two months of 
the invitation's notification. If the applicant fails to comply with this request 
in time, the fax is deemed not to have been received (see the decision of 
the President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A18). 
Written confirmation is requested if the documents communicated by fax 
are of inferior quality. 
If, in a fax, a party avails itself of Art. 14(4), the subsequent copy must be 
filed in the same language as the fax, in which case the copy is deemed 
received on the fax's filing date. The period under Rule 6(2) for filing the 
translation under Art. 14(4) begins on the day following the fax's filing date. 
Subsequent documents may not be filed by email or similar means (see 
also the notice dated 12 September 2000 concerning correspondence with 
the Office via email, OJ EPO 2000, 458). However, during telephone 
consultations and during interviews and oral proceedings held by 
videoconference, documents filed subsequently as referred to in Rule 50, 
including authorisations, must be filed by email (for more details see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 13 May 2020, OJ EPO 2020, 
A71; see also E-III, 8.5.2). 
3. 
Signature of documents 
3.1 Documents filed after filing the European patent application 
All documents, other than annexes, filed after filing the European patent 
application must be signed by the person responsible. Under Art. 133, only 
the applicant or the authorised representative may act in the European 
patent grant procedure (see A-VIII, 1.6). Documents filed after filing the 
Rule 2(1) 
Art. 14(4) 
Rule 6(2) 
Rule 50(3) 
Art. 133 
 

Part A – Chapter VIII-7 
European patent application may therefore be effectively signed only by 
these persons. 
Documents such as the priority document or its translation must be 
accompanied by a cover letter or at least bear a note on the document itself 
addressed to the EPO and duly signed by a person authorised to act before 
the EPO. This also applies, for example, to the designation of inventor if 
this has been signed by an applicant with neither residence nor principal 
place of business in one of the contracting states. As regards the 
authorisation, see A-VIII, 1.6. The signature of the entitled person 
confirming performance of a written act of procedure helps to clarify the 
state of the proceedings. It shows whether the act of procedure has been 
validly performed and also prevents circumvention of the provisions relating 
to representation. EPO Form 1038 (letter accompanying subsequently filed 
items) may also be used as a separate letter. 
Submissions filed electronically must be signed by an entitled person, 
although they may be transmitted using a smart card issued to another 
person. If the signature is omitted on a document not falling within the 
meaning of A-VIII, 3.2, the EPO must invite the party concerned to sign it 
within a fixed time limit. This also applies if the document in question bears 
the signature of an unentitled person (e.g. the secretary of an authorised 
representative), a deficiency which for the purposes of the time limits under 
way is treated as equivalent to omission of the signature of an entitled 
person. If signed in due time, the document retains its original date of 
receipt; otherwise it is deemed not received. See also A-VIII, 3.2 below. 
3.2 Documents forming part of the European patent application 
In addition to the documents referred to in A-VIII, 3.1, certain documents 
forming part of the application must be signed. These include the request 
for grant, the designation of the inventor and, where applicable, the 
authorisation of a representative. If a European patent application is filed 
electronically, a facsimile image of the signer's handwritten signature, a 
text-string signature or an enhanced electronic signature, as applicable, 
may be used to sign the above documents (Art. 12 of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A48). 
With the exception of the authorisation of a representative, the documents 
may be signed by an authorised representative instead of the applicant. 
3.3 Form of signature 
If documents are filed electronically using EPO Online Filing, the signature 
may take the form of a facsimile signature, a text-string signature or an 
enhanced electronic signature. Where documents are filed using Online 
Filing 2.0, the EPO web-form filing service or the EPO Contingency Upload 
Service, the signature may take the form of a facsimile signature or a text-
string signature. Procedural actions performed in MyEPO Portfolio require a 
signature in the form of a text string (see OJ EPO 2023, A89). 
A facsimile signature is a reproduction of the filing person's signature. A 
text-string signature is a string of characters, preceded and followed by a 
forward slash (/), selected by the signatory to prove their identity and intent 
Rule 50(3) 
Part A – Chapter VIII-8 

 
to sign. An enhanced electronic signature is an electronic signature issued 
or accepted by the EPO (see OJ EPO 2023, A48). 
For signatures accepted on electronically filed assignment documents, 
see E-XIV, 3. 
Where a document is filed by fax, the reproduction on the fax of the 
signature of the person filing the document will be considered sufficient. 
The name and position of that person must be clear from the signature 
(see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, 
OJ EPO 2019, A18). 
Where a document is filed on paper, a rubber stamp impression of a party's 
name, whether a natural or legal person, must be accompanied by a 
personal signature. Initials or other abbreviated forms will not be accepted 
as a signature. Where the party concerned is a legal person, a document 
may in general be signed by any person who purports to sign on behalf of 
that legal person. The entitlement of a person signing on behalf of a legal 
person is not checked by the EPO, except where there is reason to believe 
that the person signing is not authorised and in that case evidence of 
authority to sign should be called for. 
3.4 Joint applicants 
If there is more than one applicant (see A-VIII, 1.3), each applicant or their 
appointed representative must sign the request for grant and, where 
applicable, the appointment of the common representative. This also 
applies if one of the applicants is considered the common representative 
under Rule 151(1), first sentence. However, the common representative 
may sign the designation of inventor and all documents filed after the filing 
of the application under Rule 50(3). Authorisations on behalf of more than 
one applicant must be signed by all applicants. 
Rule 151(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter IX-1 
Chapter IX – Drawings 
This chapter deals with the requirements to be met by drawings contained 
in the application or patent. Guidance on the presentation of application 
documents, including drawings, is provided in the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113, Rule 49(2)), 
which is the legal basis for the practice described below. 
1. Graphic forms of presentation considered as drawings 
1.1 Technical drawings 
All types of technical drawings are considered drawings within the meaning 
of the EPC; these include, for instance, perspectives, exploded views, 
sections and cross-sections, details on a different scale, etc. Drawings also 
cover "flow sheets and diagrams", which include functional diagrams and 
graphic representations of a given phenomenon expressing the relationship 
between two or more magnitudes. 
Other graphic forms of presentation – chemical and mathematical formulae 
and tables – may also be included in the description, claims or abstract but 
are not subject to the same requirements as drawings (see Art. 2(8) of the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022). These are 
dealt with in A-IX, 11. If they are nevertheless submitted as drawings, they 
are subject to the same requirements as drawings. 
1.2 Photographs 
The EPC makes no express provision for photographs; they are 
nevertheless allowed where it is impossible to present in a drawing what is 
to be shown and provided that they are directly reproducible and fulfil the 
applicable requirements for drawings (e.g. paper size, margins, etc.). 
Colour photographs can be submitted but will be scanned, printed and 
made available via file inspection only in black and white. If colours are 
necessary for discerning details of the photographs submitted, these details 
may be lost when the photograph is made available in black and white via 
publication and file inspection. See also A-IX, 7.1. 
Photographs (or their copies) are to be numbered like drawings and briefly 
described in the description (Rule 42(1)(d)). 
2. Representation of drawings 
2.1 Grouping of drawings 
All drawings must be grouped together on the sheets specifically intended 
for drawings and may not be included in the description, claims or abstract, 
even if these finish at the top of a page or leave sufficient room, and even if 
there is only one figure. 
Rule 49 
Rule 50 
OJ EPO 2022, A113 
Part A – Chapter IX-2 

 
2.2 Reproducibility of drawings 
The drawings must be presented in such a way as to allow their electronic 
or direct reproduction by scanning, photography, electrostatic processes, 
photo offset and microfilming in an unlimited number of copies. 
2.3 Figure accompanying the abstract 
As regards the figure, or exceptionally figures, to accompany the abstract in 
a European patent application containing drawings, see A-III, 10.3 and 
F-II, 2.3 and 2.4. The figure(s) illustrating the abstract must be the figure(s) 
most representative of the invention and must be chosen from the drawings 
accompanying the application. It is therefore not permissible to draw a 
special figure for the abstract that differs from the other figures in the 
application. 
3. 
Conditions if drawings are filed on paper 
In the case of paper filings, drawings must be on sheets of A4 paper 
(29.7 cm x 21 cm) which must be pliable, strong, white, smooth, matt and 
durable (recommended paper weight: 80-120 g/m2, see OJ EPO 1994, 74). 
All sheets must be free from cracks, creases and folds. Only one side of the 
sheet may be used. The use of card is not allowed. 
Each sheet must be reasonably free from erasures and must be free from 
alterations. Non-compliance with this rule may be authorised if the 
authenticity of the content is not in question and the requirements for good 
reproduction are not in jeopardy. 
Any corrections made must be durable and permanent so that they cannot 
give rise to any doubt. Special products for corrections, such as white 
masking fluid, may be used, provided they are indelible and comply with the 
other requirements of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
25 November 2022. 
The sheets must be connected in such a way that they can easily be turned 
over, separated and joined together again. 
Permanent fastenings (for example, crimped eyelets) are not permitted. 
Only temporary fastenings (staples, paper clips and grips, etc.) that leave 
only slight marks in the margin may be used. 
4. 
Presentation of the sheets of drawings 
4.1 Usable surface area of sheets 
On sheets containing drawings, the usable surface area may not exceed 
26.2 cm x 17 cm. These sheets may not contain frames round the usable or 
used surface. The minimum margins are as follows: top side: 2.5 cm; 
left side: 2.5 cm; right side: 1.5 cm; bottom 1 cm. 
4.2 Numbering of sheets of drawings 
All sheets making up the European patent application must be numbered in 
consecutive Arabic numerals. These must be centred at the top of the 
sheet but not in the top margin. 
Rule 49(2) 
OJ EPO 2022, A113 
 

Part A – Chapter IX-3 
The numbering on sheets of drawings must be positioned within the 
maximum usable surface area as defined in Art. 1(1) of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022. Instead of appearing in the 
middle of the sheet, the numbering may, however, be positioned towards 
the right-hand side if the drawing comes too close to the middle of the edge 
of the usable surface. This numbering should be clear, for example in 
numbers larger than those used for reference numbers. 
All application sheets must be numbered consecutively. The application 
consists of all the following documents: the request, the description, the 
claims, the drawings and the abstract. The numbering should preferably be 
effected using three separate series of numbering, each beginning with 
one. The first series applies to the request only and is already printed on 
the form to be used. The second series commences with the first sheet of 
the description and continues through the claims until the last sheet of the 
abstract. The third series applies only to the sheets of the drawings and 
commences with the first sheet of such drawings. 
There are no objections to including the description, claims, abstract and 
drawings in one series of numbering beginning with one. The series of 
numbering must then commence with the first sheet of the description. 
5. General layout of drawings 
The various figures on the same sheet of drawings must be laid out 
according to certain requirements as to page-setting and numbering, and 
figures divided into several parts must comply with particular requirements. 
5.1 Page-setting 
As far as possible all figures of the drawings should be set out upright on 
the sheets. If a figure is broader than it is high, it may be set out so that the 
top and bottom of the figure lie along the sides of the sheet with the top of 
the figure on the left side of the sheet. 
In this case, if other figures are drawn on the same sheet, they should be 
set out in the same way, so that all the figures on a single sheet lie along 
parallel axes. 
Where the sheet has to be turned in order to read the figures, the 
numbering should appear on the right-hand side of the sheet. 
5.2 Numbering of figures 
The different figures must be numbered consecutively in Arabic numerals, 
independently of the numbering of the sheets. 
This numbering should be preceded by the abbreviation "FIG", whatever 
the official language of the application. Where a single figure is sufficient to 
illustrate the invention, it should not be numbered and the abbreviation 
"FIG" must not appear. This also applies to numbers and letters identifying 
the figures, i.e. they must be simple and clear and may not be used in 
association with brackets, circles or inverted commas. They should also be 
larger than the numbers used for reference signs. 
Part A – Chapter IX-4 

 
An exception to the above may be permitted only as regards partial figures 
intended to form one whole figure, irrespective of whether they appear on 
one or several sheets. In this case the whole figure may be identified by the 
same number followed by a capital letter (e.g. FIG 7A, FIG 7B). 
5.3 Whole figure 
Where figures drawn on two or more sheets are intended to form one whole 
figure, the figures on the various sheets must be so arranged that the whole 
figure can be assembled without concealing any part of the partial figures. 
Partial figures drawn on separate sheets must always be capable of being 
linked edge to edge, that is to say no figure may contain parts of another. 
The case may arise where the parts of a whole figure are drawn on a single 
sheet following a layout different from that of the whole figure, e.g. a very 
long figure divided into several parts placed one above the other and not 
next to one another on a sheet. This practice is permitted. However, the 
relationship between the different figures must be clear and unambiguous. 
It is therefore recommended that a scaled-down figure be included showing 
the whole formed by the partial figures and indicating the positions of the 
sections shown. 
6. 
Prohibited matter 
The provisions on the omission of prohibited matter within the meaning of 
Rule 48(1)(a) (see A-III, 8.1 and F-II, 7.2) also apply to drawings. 
Statements or other matter of the type referred to in Rule 48(1)(c) 
(see F-II, 7.4) that are likely to appear in drawings are, in particular, various 
kinds of advertising, e.g. where the applicant includes in the drawing 
obvious business or departmental markings or a reference to an industrial 
design or model, whether registered or not. Doing so introduces matter that 
is clearly irrelevant or unnecessary, which is expressly prohibited by 
Rule 48. 
7. 
Executing of drawings 
7.1 Drawings of lines and strokes 
The decision of the President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 sets 
certain standards for lines and strokes in the drawing to permit satisfactory 
reproduction by the various means described in Art. 2 of that decision. 
The drawings must be executed in black. Colour drawings can be 
submitted but will be scanned, printed and made available via file 
inspection in black and white only (see also A-IX, 1.2 in respect of colour 
photographs). In respect of the content of priority documents issued by the 
EPO in such a case, see A-XI, 5.2. 
In all cases the thickness of the lines and strokes must take into account 
the scale, nature, execution and perfect legibility of the drawing and of the 
reproductions. 
Rule 48(1) and 
(2) 
Rule 48(1)(c) 
 

Part A – Chapter IX-5 
All lines must be drawn with the aid of drafting instruments save those for 
which no instrument exists, e.g. irregular diagrams and structures. 
7.2 Shading 
The use of shading in figures is allowed provided it assists in their 
understanding and is not so extensive as to impede legibility. 
7.3 Cross-sections 
7.3.1 Sectional diagrams 
Where the figure is a cross-section on another figure, the latter should 
indicate the position and may indicate the viewing direction. 
Each sectional figure should be capable of being quickly identified, 
especially where several cross-sections are made on the same figure, 
e.g. by inscribing the words "Section on AB", or to avoid the use of lettering, 
by marking each end of the cross-section line on the diagram with a single 
Roman numeral. This number will be the same as the (Arabic) numeral 
identifying the figure where the section is illustrated. For example: 
"Figure 22 illustrates a section taken along the line XXII-XXII of Figure 21". 
7.3.2 Hatching 
A cross-section must be set out and drawn in the same manner as a 
normal view whose parts in cross-section are hatched with regularly spaced 
strokes, the space between strokes being chosen on the basis of the total 
area to be hatched. 
Hatching should not impede the clear reading of the reference signs and 
leading lines. Consequently, if it is not possible to place references outside 
the hatched area, the hatching may be broken off wherever references are 
inserted. Certain types of hatching may be given a specific meaning. 
7.4 Scale of drawings 
If the scale of the figure is such that all essential details would not be 
clearly distinguished when reproduced electronically or photographically 
with a linear reduction in size to two-thirds, then the figure must be redrawn 
to a larger scale, and if necessary the figure should be split up into partial 
figures so that a linear reduction in size to two-thirds is still intelligible. 
The graphic representation of the scale of drawings in cases where its 
inclusion is considered useful must be such that it is still usable when the 
drawing is reproduced in reduced format. This excludes indications of size 
such as "actual size" or "scale ½", both on the drawings and in the 
description, in favour of graphic representations of the scale. 
7.5 Numbers, letters and reference signs 
Numbers, letters and reference signs and any other data given on the 
sheets of drawings, such as the numbering of figures, pages of the 
drawing, acceptable text matter, graduations on scales, etc., must be 
simple and clear, and not used in association with any brackets, inverted 
commas, circles or outlines whatsoever. Signs such as 6' and 35" are not 
regarded as including inverted commas and are therefore permitted. 
Part A – Chapter IX-6 

 
Numbers, letters and reference signs should preferably all be laid out the 
same way up as the diagram to avoid having to rotate the page. 
7.5.1 Leading lines 
Leading lines are lines between reference signs and the details referred to. 
Such lines may be straight or curved and should be as short as possible. 
They must originate in the immediate proximity of the reference sign and 
extend at least as far as the features indicated. 
Leading lines must be executed in the same way as lines in the drawing in 
accordance with Art. 1(2)(a) of the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 25 November 2022. 
7.5.2 Arrows 
Arrows may be used at the end of the leading lines, provided that their 
meaning is clear. They may indicate a number of points: 
(i) 
a freestanding arrow indicates the entire section towards which it 
points 
(ii) 
an arrow touching a line indicates the surface shown by the line 
looking along the direction of the arrow. 
7.5.3 Height of the numbers and letters in the drawings 
A minimum size of 0.32 cm is required for all numbers and letters used on 
the drawings so that their reduction in size to two-thirds remains easily 
legible. 
The Latin alphabet should normally be used for letters. The Greek alphabet 
is to be accepted however where it is customarily used, e.g. to indicate 
angles, wavelengths, etc. 
7.5.4 Consistent use of reference signs in description, claims and 
drawings 
Reference signs not mentioned in the description and claims may not 
appear in the drawing, and vice versa. 
Reference signs appearing in the drawing must be given in the description 
and the claims taken as a whole. As regards use of these signs in the 
claims, see F-IV, 4.18. 
Features of a drawing should not be designated by a reference in cases 
where the feature itself has not been described. This situation may arise as 
a result of amendments to the description involving the deletion of pages or 
whole paragraphs. One solution would be to strike out on the drawing 
reference signs that have been deleted in the description. Such corrections 
must be made in accordance with Art. 2(11) of the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 25 November 2022. 
Where for any reason a figure is deleted then the applicant or proprietor 
ought to delete all reference signs relating solely to that figure appearing in 
the description and claims. 
 

Part A – Chapter IX-7 
In the case of applications dealing with complex subjects and incorporating 
a large number of drawings, a reference key may be attached to the end of 
the description. This key may take whatever form is appropriate and 
contain all the reference signs together with the designation of the features 
that they indicate. This method could have the advantage of standardising 
the terminology used in the description. 
7.5.5 Consistent use of reference signs in drawings 
The same features, when denoted by reference signs, must be denoted by 
the same signs throughout the application. 
It would be very confusing if a single feature were allocated different 
reference signs in the various drawings. However, where several variants 
of an invention are described, each with reference to a particular figure, and 
where each variant contains features whose function is the same or 
basically the same, the features may, if this is indicated in the description, 
be identified by reference numbers made up of the number of the figure to 
which it relates followed by the number of the feature, which is the same for 
all variants, so that a single number is formed, e.g. the common feature 
"15" would be indicated by "115" in Fig. 1 while the corresponding feature 
would be indicated by "215" in Fig. 2. This system has the advantage that 
an individual feature and the figure on which it is to be considered can be 
indicated at the same time. It can also make complex cases involving many 
pages of drawings easier to read. Instead of the common reference sign 
being prefixed by the number of a figure, it may, when the individual 
variants are described with reference to particular groups of figures, be 
prefixed by the number of the particular variant to which it relates; this 
should be explained in the description. 
7.6 Variations in proportions 
Elements of the same figure must be in proportion to each other unless a 
difference in proportion is indispensable for the clarity of the figure. 
As a preferred alternative to a difference in proportion within one figure for 
clarity purposes, a supplementary figure may be added giving a 
larger-scale illustration of the element of the initial figure. In such cases it is 
recommended that the enlarged element shown in the second figure be 
surrounded by a finely drawn or "dot-dash" circle in the first figure 
pinpointing its location without obscuring the figure. 
8. Text matter on drawings 
It should first be noted that Art. 1(2)(d) and (g) of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 also applies to text matter 
on the drawings. 
For indications of the type "section on AB", see A-IX, 7.3.1. 
The drawings must not contain text matter except when absolutely 
indispensable, and then only a single word or a few words. As flow sheets 
and diagrams are considered drawings (see A-IX, 1.1), text must be kept to 
the absolute minimum indispensable for understanding the drawing. 
Part A – Chapter IX-8 

 
Where text matter is deemed indispensable for understanding the drawing, 
only the barest minimum of words should be used, and a space free of all 
lines of drawings should be left around them for the translation. 
Compared with other types of drawings, flow sheets comprising method 
steps may need more than just a bare minimum of words to be understood 
since the essential information may not be adequately conveyed by the 
graphical part of the drawing. In such cases, the requirement to keep the 
text to an absolute minimum may be relaxed somewhat to allow more than 
a few words, such as a short sentence, for each method step. 
As regards the justification for text matter on drawings, see F-II, 5.1. 
9. 
Conventional symbols 
Known devices may be illustrated by symbols having a universally 
recognised conventional meaning, provided no further detail is essential for 
understanding the subject-matter of the invention. Other signs and symbols 
may be used on condition that they are not likely to be confused with 
existing conventional symbols, that they are readily identifiable, i.e. simple, 
and that they are clearly explained in the text of the description. 
Different types of hatching may also have different conventional meanings 
as regards the nature of a material seen in cross-section. 
10. Amendments to drawings 
Amendments are permitted to the drawings, as well as to the other 
documents. These amendments may be made at the request of the party 
concerned or of the EPO. The amendments may concern either clerical 
errors or more substantial changes. 
Amendments to drawings are, in general, subject to the same rules as 
apply in respect of amendments to other application documents and 
therefore do not require further analysis here. See also A-III, 16, A-V, 2, 
B-XI, 8, C-III, 2, C-IV, 5, Part H, in particular H-II, 2 and H-III, 2. 
The general rule governing the admissibility of amendments, which the 
examiner must always bear in mind, is that they must not extend the 
content of the application as filed, i.e. they must not have the effect of 
introducing new material. 
If drawings that depart substantially from the physical requirements laid 
down in the Implementing Regulations are filed to establish a particular 
date of filing or retain a priority date, the Receiving Section will permit them 
to be amended or replaced to provide drawings complying with the 
Implementing Regulations, provided that it is clear that the amendments do 
not introduce new material into the application. In view of this proviso, 
applicants should take care that any "informal" drawings filed clearly show 
all the features necessary to illustrate the invention. 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part A – Chapter IX-9 
11. Graphic forms of presentation not considered as drawings 
11.1 Chemical and mathematical formulae 
In exceptional cases, chemical or mathematical formulae may be written by 
hand or drawn if necessary, but it is recommended that appropriate aids 
such as stencils or transfers be used. For practical reasons, formulae may 
be grouped together on one or more sheets annexed to the description and 
paginated with it. It is recommended in such cases that each formula be 
designated by a reference sign and the description should contain 
references to these formulae whenever necessary. 
Chemical or mathematical formulae must employ symbols in general use 
and must be drawn in such a way that they are completely unambiguous. 
Figures, letters and signs that are not typed must be legible and identical in 
form in the various formulae, irrespective of the document in which they 
appear. 
Chemical or mathematical formulae appearing in the text of the application 
or patent must have symbols, the capital letters of which are at least 
0.21 cm high. Where they appear on sheets of drawings, these symbols 
must be at least 0.32 cm high. 
All mathematical symbols used in a formula appearing in a description, in 
an annex or on sheets of drawings must be explained in the description 
unless their significance is clear from the context. In any case, the 
mathematical symbols used may be collated in a list. 
11.2 Tables 
11.2.1 Tables in the description 
For the sake of convenience, the tables may also be grouped together on 
one or more sheets annexed to the description and paginated with it. 
If two or more tables are necessary, each should be identified by a Roman 
number, independently of the pagination of the description or drawings or of 
the figure numbering, or by a capital letter, or by a title indicating its 
contents, or by some other means. 
Each line or column in a table must begin with an entry explaining what it 
represents and, if necessary, the units used. 
Both characters and tables alike must satisfy the requirements of Art. 2(7) 
and (4) of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
25 November 2022 regarding the maximum usable surface areas of sheets. 
11.2.2 Tables in the claims 
The claims may include tables if their subject-matter indicates a need for 
them. In this case, the tables must be included in the text of the relevant 
claim; they may not be annexed to the claims nor may reference be made 
to tables contained in or annexed to the description. The claims may refer 
to other application documents only where this is absolutely necessary 
Part A – Chapter IX-10 

 
(see F-IV, 4.17). The mere desire to avoid copying said documents does 
not constitute absolute necessity. 
 

Part A – Chapter X-1 
Chapter X – Fees 
1. General 
Various fees have to be paid for a European patent application, to renew a 
European patent and to obtain legal remedies. Fees may also need to be 
paid by third parties, as is the case, for example, for issuing certified copies 
of documents or the certified extract from the European Patent Register 
(see OJ EPO 2019, A15). Fees may be validly paid by any person. The 
amounts of the fees, the ways in which they are to be paid and the date of 
payment are determined in the Rules relating to Fees (RFees). Guidance 
for the payment of fees, expenses and prices with information about: 
– 
the current version of the Rules relating to Fees and the schedule of 
fees 
– 
important implementing rules to the Rules relating to Fees 
– 
the payment and refund of fees and expenses 
– 
other notices concerning fees and prices and 
– 
international applications, including Euro-PCT applications entering 
the European phase, 
as well as the amounts of the principal fees for European and international 
applications and an extract from the Rules relating to Fees is published at 
regular intervals in the Official Journal. lnformation relating to fees and 
methods of payment, including the EPO bank account for payments in 
euro, can also be found on the EPO website (epo.org). 
The EPC and its Implementing Regulations lay down the time limits for 
paying fees and the legal consequences of non-compliance with the time 
limits. The time limits for payment and the legal consequences of 
non-payment are dealt with in the chapters of the Guidelines covering the 
respective stages of the procedure. The methods of payment, the date on 
which payment is considered to be made, due dates, particulars concerning 
the purpose of payments and reimbursement of fees are all dealt with 
below. 
2. Methods of payment 
Fees may be paid: 
(i) 
by payment or transfer to a bank account held by the EPO 
(ii) 
by debiting a deposit account opened in the records of the EPO in 
Munich (see A-X, 4.2 and 4.3) 
(iii) 
by credit card (see A-X, 4.4) 
(iv) 
by requesting reallocation of a refund (see A-X, 10.4). 
Art. 5 RFees 
Part A – Chapter X-2 

 
3. 
Currencies 
The fees due to the EPO must be paid in euro. A debit order must be in 
euro. 
4. 
Date considered as date on which payment is made 
4.1 Payment or transfer to a bank account held by the European 
Patent Organisation 
The date on which payment is deemed made is the date on which the 
amount payable actually enters the European Patent Organisation's bank 
account. The date on which payment is deemed made may therefore be 
the day following the payment or transfer or an even later date in the event 
of delays within the bank. However, payment may still be considered made 
in due time, despite being paid late, if the payment or transfer was effected 
before expiry of the time limit for payment in a contracting state and if 
evidence to this effect is provided (see A-X, 6). For the steps required for 
the efficient processing of payments made by bank transfer, see the notice 
from the EPO dated 19 July 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A81. 
4.2 Deposit accounts with the EPO 
4.2.1 General remarks 
The Arrangements for deposit accounts (ADA) and their annexes are 
updated on a regular basis, either in their entirety or in part, whenever a 
change or clarification of the scope of practice is required. A consolidated 
version of the ADA was last published as Supplementary publication 3, 
OJ EPO 2022. The ADA can also be found on the EPO website (epo.org). 
A distinction must be drawn, in connection with deposit accounts, between: 
(i) 
payments to replenish deposit accounts and 
(ii) 
payments of fees in connection with proceedings under the EPC or 
the PCT. 
4.2.2 Payments to replenish a deposit account 
Payments to replenish a deposit account are to be made in euro to the 
EPO bank account. Payments in a different currency will only be accepted 
if freely convertible. However, the deposit account will always be credited in 
euro (the only currency in which these accounts are kept) after conversion 
at the current rate of exchange. Replenishments are credited to the deposit 
account on the date on which the payment actually enters the EPO bank 
account. 
Repayments of deposit account balances can only be remitted to the 
deposit account holder. For this purpose, the deposit account holder must 
send a signed request as an email attachment to the EPO at 
support@epo.org or complete the online contact form available on the EPO 
website and submit it together with all bank details necessary for the 
transfer (point 5.2 ADA). 
Art. 5 RFees 
Point 1 ADA 
Art. 7(1), 
(3) and 
(4) RFees 
Art. 7(2) RFees 
Point 3 ADA 
Point 1 ADA 
Point 3.2 ADA 
Point 3.3 ADA 
Point 4.2 ADA 
Point 5.2 ADA 
 

Part A – Chapter X-3 
4.2.3 Debiting the deposit account 
Debiting occurs on the basis of an electronic debit order which has been 
duly signed or authenticated by the account holder, the authorised 
representative or a person authorised by the account holder using means 
accepted for the online service in question. The debit order may be for 
individual fees for one or more patent applications, i.e. a single or batch 
debit order, or an automatic debit order for one or more patent applications. 
Batch debit orders are only possible in Central Fee Payment (see A-X, 4.3). 
The debit order for European patent applications must be filed in an 
electronically processable format (XML) via: 
– 
EPO Online Filing using EPO Forms 1001E, 1200E, 2300E or 1038E 
– 
Online Filing 2.0 using EPO Forms 1001E, 1200E or 1038E 
– 
Central Fee Payment 
– 
MyEPO Portfolio. 
See also the decision of the President of the EPO dated 19 July 2022 
concerning the revision of the Arrangements for deposit accounts and their 
annexes, Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2022, the notice from the 
EPO dated 19 July 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A81, the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 24 April 2023 concerning the revision of the 
Arrangements for deposit accounts and their annexes in view of the entry 
into force of the Unitary Patent system, Supplementary publication 3, 
OJ EPO 2023, 10, the notice from the EPO dated 24 April 2023, 
Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2023, 20, and the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 13 June 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A58. 
Debit orders submitted in any other way, e.g. on paper, by fax, via the EPO 
web-form filing service or the EPO Contingency Upload Service or using a 
different format such as a PDF attachment, are invalid and thus will not be 
executed (for an exception, see A-II, 1.5). This may result in the time limit 
for paying a fee being missed. In that case applicants may make use of any 
of the legal remedies available. 
If any of the accepted means of filing debit orders is unavailable at the EPO 
on the last day for paying a particular fee, the payment period will be 
extended until the next day on which all such means as are available for 
the type of application concerned can be accessed again. Payment periods 
are also extended in the event of a general unavailability of electronic 
communication services, or other like reasons within the meaning of 
Rule 134(5) (see the notice from the EPO dated 22 October 2020, 
OJ EPO 2020, A120). 
When using the EPO's online filing services, "deposit account" must be 
selected as the payment method to pay any selected fees. 
In general, debit orders will be processed immediately upon their receipt, 
provided there are sufficient funds in the deposit account and provided a 
Point 7.1.1 ADA 
Point 7.1.2 ADA 
Point 7.1.3 ADA 
Point 7.1.3 ADA 
Point 10.3 ADA 
Rule 134(1) and (5) 
Point 11 ADA 
Point 7.2.1 ADA 
Point 4.4 AAD 
Part A – Chapter X-4 

 
deferred execution date (see next paragraph) has not been specified. 
Automatic debit orders are processed at the end of the day on the decisive 
payment date. 
A debit order may specify that payment is to be executed at a date later 
than the submission date. In that case, the payment date is deemed to be 
the execution date specified. Payment orders with a deferred execution 
date may be executed up to 40 days after the submission date. 
A debit order must be carried out notwithstanding incorrect information 
given in it if the intention of the person giving the order is clear 
(see T 152/82). The EPO corrects a debit order on its own initiative, for 
example, if there is a discrepancy between the type of fee intended to be 
paid and the corresponding amount due on the date of receipt of the debit 
order (see also A-X, 7.1.2). The party is informed of any such correction by 
means of a communication from the EPO providing a two-month period for 
objection in the event of disagreement by the party. In that case, the fee will 
be debited as indicated in the (erroneous) debit order or, if applicable, any 
corrective booking executed will be reverted. The principles outlined above, 
however, do not allow the correction of a debit order by adding any fee that 
is not indicated in it, even if, according to the status of proceedings, that fee 
is due on the date of receipt of the debit order. 
A debit order may be revoked in whole or in part by the person making the 
payment by sending a signed written notice to support@epo.org by email or 
by completing the online contact form available on the EPO website 
(epo.org) and submitting it together with the signed written notice. For a 
debit order revocation notice to be effective, it must be received by the EPO 
no later than on the date on which the debit order is received. A debit order 
with deferred payment date may be revoked in Central Fee Payment until 
one day before the intended execution date or at the latest on the intended 
execution date by signed written notice sent to the EPO as indicated above. 
Payments via deposit account effected in Central Fee Payment are 
validated, meaning that the debit order for a fee is automatically rejected if 
the fee falls within one of the following categories: 
– 
renewal fees and fees for the transfer of rights made in respect of 
patent applications for which the loss of rights or the refusal has 
become final 
– 
renewal fees for granted European patents 
– 
renewal fees received before the earliest valid payment dates under 
Rule 51(1) 
– 
double-payments for fees that can be paid only once in the 
proceedings before the EPO. 
Point 10.2 ADA 
Point 13 ADA 
Point 9 ADA 
 

Part A – Chapter X-5 
4.2.4 Date of receipt of the debit order; insufficient funds 
Provided there are sufficient funds in the deposit account on the date the 
EPO receives the debit order or on the execution date, that date will be 
considered the date on which the payment is made. 
This applies also where a debit order is filed together with an application 
filed under Art. 75(1)(b) with a competent national authority of a contracting 
state (see A-II, 1.6). If the EPO does not receive the debit order until after 
expiry of the period allowed for paying fees which can be paid on filing, that 
period is deemed observed if evidence is available or presented to the EPO 
to show that the debit order was filed with the competent authority of the 
contracting state at the same time as the application, provided that 
sufficient funds were available in the account at the time the period expired. 
If, on the date of receipt of the debit order or on the date specified as the 
execution date (point 10 ADA), the account does not contain sufficient 
funds to fully cover all the fees indicated for an application (shortfall), the 
fees are booked in ascending order of application number ("PCT" before 
"EP" before "UP") and fee code, according to point 7.3 ADA, as long as the 
funds allow. Once a debit order cannot be executed in full due to 
insufficient funds, no other debit order is booked until the account is duly 
replenished. The outstanding payment is considered to have been made on 
the date on which the deposit account is duly replenished. On the 
application of the safety provision in the case of late receipt of the 
replenishment payment at the EPO, see A-X, 6.2.2. 
4.3 Automatic debiting procedure 
A deposit account may also be debited for one or more European patent 
applications on the basis of an automatic debit order, signed or 
authenticated by or on behalf of the account holder (automatic debiting 
procedure), in accordance with the Arrangements for the automatic debiting 
procedure (abbreviated to "AAD"). The AAD plus explanatory notes are 
published as Annexes A.1 and A.2 to the ADA. The AAD can also be found 
on the EPO website (epo.org). 
An automatic debit order may be filed on behalf of the applicant, the patent 
proprietor or the appointed representative and must be filed in an 
electronically processable format (XML) via EPO Online Filing or Online 
Filing 2.0 using EPO Forms 1001E, 1200E or 1038E, or via Central Fee 
Payment. An automatic debit order can be revoked only via Central Fee 
Payment and only for the proceedings as a whole. 
An automatic debit order extends to all types of fees covered by the 
automatic debiting procedure and payable in respect of the proceedings 
specified in it. As the proceedings progress, each fee is automatically 
debited and treated as having been paid in due time, provided that the 
deposit account contains sufficient funds. The automatic debit order may 
not be restricted to specific types of fees. 
In the case of multiple payments from the same deposit account, the EPO 
processes automatic debit orders in ascending order of application number 
("PCT" before "EP" before "UP") and fee code (unless otherwise indicated) 
Point 7.2.1 ADA 
Point 7.4.1 ADA 
Point 7.3 ADA 
Point 7.4.1 ADA 
Point 7.4.2 ADA 
Point 7.5 ADA 
Point 14 ADA 
Point 1 AAD 
Point 10 AAD 
Point 4.4 AAD 
Point 4.5 AAD 
Point 5 AAD 
Part A – Chapter X-6 

 
at the end of the day on the decisive payment date. It is thus important for 
the deposit account to contain sufficient funds at the decisive payment date 
to cover all automatic debit orders due. 
4.4 Payment by credit card 
Payments by credit card must be made via Central Fee Payment, which is 
available on the EPO website (epo.org), using a credit card accepted by the 
EPO (American Express, Mastercard and Visa). They are deemed made on 
the date on which the transaction is approved (see OJ EPO 2017, A72). 
The EPO bears any transaction-related charges. The requirements and 
arrangements for payments by credit card are set out in detail in the notice 
from the EPO dated 16 February 2022 (see OJ EPO 2022, A18). 
5. 
Due date for fees 
5.1 General 
5.1.1 Due date 
In the EPC, the term "due date" has a special meaning, namely the first day 
on which payment of a fee may be validly effected, not the last day of a 
period for such payment (see A-X, 6, "Payment in due time"). The due date 
for fees is generally laid down by provisions of the EPC or of the PCT. If no 
due date is specified, the fee is due on the date of receipt of the request for 
the service incurring the fee concerned. 
A fee may not be validly paid before the due date. The only exceptions are: 
(i) 
renewal fees (see A-X, 5.2.4)  
(ii) 
fees paid voluntarily in response to the communication under 
Rule 71(3) (where amendments are also filed in response to that 
communication, see C-V, 4.2). 
Payments that may not be validly made before the due date may be 
refunded by the EPO. If payment is made shortly before the due date, it is 
possible that the EPO will not return the payment. In this case, however, 
payment only takes effect on the due date. This does not apply to 
payments via deposit account of renewal fees made before the earliest 
valid payment dates under Rule 51(1), see A-X, 5.2.4. 
5.1.2 Amount of the fee 
When the fees are generally increased, the date of payment is set as the 
relevant date for determining the amount of the fees (see Art. 2 of the 
Administrative Council decision of 5 June 1992, OJ EPO 1992, 344). As a 
rule, setting the date of payment as the relevant date makes it unnecessary 
to ascertain the actual due date for determining the amount of the fee. Fees 
cannot validly be paid before the due date (apart from the exceptions 
mentioned in A-X, 5.1.1(i) and (ii)). 
Art. 5 RFees, 
Art. 7 RFees 
Art. 4(1) RFees 
Rule 51(1), 
2nd sentence 
 

Part A – Chapter X-7 
5.2 Due date for specific fees 
5.2.1 Filing fee and search fee 
The filing and search fees are due on the day the European patent 
application is filed. They must be paid either within one month of that date 
(Rule 38(1), Rule 17(2), Rule 36(3)) or, for Euro-PCT applications, within 
31 months of the filing date or, where applicable, of the earliest priority 
claimed (Rule 159(1)(c) and (e)). Where fees are paid before expiry of the 
31-month period and early processing is not explicitly requested 
(see E-IX, 2.8), they will be retained by the EPO on the assumption that the 
applicant indeed wishes to pursue the European-phase processing of the 
application on expiry of the 31-month period (see A-III, 13.1). For the 
additional fees payable as part of the filing fee, see A-III, 13.2 and 
A-IV, 1.4.1.1. 
5.2.2 Examination fee and designation fee 
The examination fee is due when the request for examination is filed. Since 
the latter is contained in the request for grant form (EPO Form 1001), the 
examination fee may be paid straight away on the European patent 
application's filing date if the application is filed with said prescribed 
EPO Form 1001. It may be paid up to expiry of the period laid down in 
Rule 70(1), namely within six months of the date on which the European 
Patent Bulletin mentions the publication of the European search report. 
The designation fee falls due upon publication of the mention of the 
European search report. It may be paid within six months of the mentioned 
date of publication (Rules 39(1), 17(3) and 36(4)). Where paid before the 
due date, e.g. upon filing of the application, the designation fee will 
however be retained by the EPO. These payments will only be considered 
valid from the due date, provided that the amount paid corresponds to the 
amount payable on the date of payment (see A-X, 5.1.2). 
For Euro-PCT applications, see E-IX, 2.1.4 and E-IX, 2.8. 
5.2.3 Fee for grant and publishing 
The fee for grant and publishing falls due on notification of the 
communication under Rule 71(3) requesting that this fee be paid. Under 
Rule 71(4), the same applies for claims fees added during the procedure to 
those that were already paid under Rule 45(1) and (2) or Rule 162(1) and 
(2) (see A-X, 7.3.2). 
5.2.4 Renewal fees 
Renewal fees for a European patent application in respect of the coming 
year are due on the last day of the month containing the anniversary of the 
European patent application's filing date. 
According to Rule 51(1) as amended with effect from 1 April 2018 
(OJ EPO 2018, A2), the renewal fee in respect of the third year may be 
paid up to six months before it falls due. All other renewal fees may not be 
validly paid more than three months before they fall due.  
Rule 71(1) 
Rule 71(4) 
Rule 51(1) 
Part A – Chapter X-8 

 
Example A:  
15.11.2016  
Filing date 
31.05.2018  
Earliest date for valid payment of third-year 
renewal fee under Rule 51(1) 
30.11.2018  
Due date for third-year renewal fee under 
Rule 51(1) 
31.08.2019 
Earliest date for valid payment of 
fourth-year renewal fee under Rule 51(1) 
30.11.2019  
Due date for fourth-year renewal fee under 
Rule 51(1) 
Example B: 
15.07.2016 
Priority date 
14.07.2017  
Filing date 
31.01.2019  
Earliest date for valid payment of third-year 
renewal fee under Rule 51(1)  
15.02.2019 
Expiry of 31-month period for the 
performance of all acts required under 
Rule 159(1)  
31.07.2019  
Due date for third-year renewal fee under 
Rule 51(1) 
30.04.2020 
Earliest date for valid payment of 
fourth-year renewal fee under Rule 51(1)  
31.07.2020  
Due date for fourth year renewal fee under 
Rule 51(1) 
Renewal fee payments made before the permissible prepayment periods 
are not valid. If a debit order for a renewal fee is received via Central Fee 
Payment before the earliest valid payment dates under Rule 51(1), it will be 
rejected at source by the validation functionality (see A-X, 4.2.3). If a 
payment is made too early either by filing a valid debit order via OLF and 
Online Filing 2.0 or by using any other payment method (i.e. bank transfer 
or credit card), the renewal fee will be refunded by the EPO according to 
the procedures laid down in A-X, 10. 
If the renewal fee has not been validly paid on or before the due date, it 
may still be validly paid within six months of the said date, provided that the 
additional fee is paid within this period. The additional fee can be paid until 
the last day of the sixth month following the month containing the 
anniversary of the date of filing (see J 4/91, reasons 2.7). This six-month 
period begins on the last day of the month referred to in Rule 51(1), first 
sentence, even if the circumstances described in Rule 134(1), (2) and (5) 
apply. Rule 134 is applicable to the calculation of the expiry of the 
six-month time limit for payment of the additional fee (see J 4/91, 
reasons 3.2). Whilst a notice draws the applicant's attention to the 
possibility under Rule 51(2) and Art. 2(1), item 5, RFees, the omission of 
such notification may not be invoked (see J 12/84 and J 1/89). For renewal 
fees for European divisional applications, see A-IV, 1.4.3. 
For Euro-PCT applications, if the renewal fee in respect of the third year 
would have fallen due earlier under Rule 51(1), the due date is deferred to 
Rule 51(2) 
Rule 134 
 

Part A – Chapter X-9 
the last day of the 31-month period under Rule 159(1). This deferred due 
date, and hence the expiry of another period (the 31-month period), forms 
the basis for calculating the additional period for payment of the renewal 
fee with an additional fee (see J 1/89, the principles of which apply). For 
example: 
20.04.2016 (Wed) 
Priority date 
17.10.2016 (Mon) 
Filing date 
31.10.2018 (Wed) 
Due date for third-year renewal fee under 
Rule 51(1) 
20.11.2018 (Tue) 
Expiry of 31-month period under 
Rule 159(1) = deferred due date for 
third-year renewal fee 
20.05.2019 (Mon) 
Last day for payment of the renewal fee 
(plus additional fee) since the six-month 
period under Rule 51(2) expires that day 
If the applicant requests entry into the regional phase before the expiry of 
the 31-month period (see Art. 23(2) PCT and Art. 40(2) PCT), in order for 
the request to become effective the renewal fee in respect of the third year 
has to be paid if the fee has fallen due earlier under Rule 51(1). If the 
renewal fee is not paid on the date early processing is requested, the 
request for early processing will be effective only from the date on which 
the renewal fee is paid (and all further requirements necessary on the latter 
date have been complied with) (see E-IX, 2.8). 
The obligation to pay renewal fees terminates with the payment of the 
renewal fee due in respect of the (patent) year in which the mention of the 
grant of the European patent is published, see Art. 86(2). "Patent years" 
are calculated as from the application's filing date. The first patent year 
(Art. 86(1), Art. 141(1)) starts on the filing date and ends on the same date 
of the following year. For the second and subsequent years, the patent year 
starts one day after the anniversary of the filing date and ends on the same 
day as the filing date of the following year. 
Example of due date and time limits for payment: 
15.12.2016 (Thu) 
Priority date 
02.07.2017 (Sun) 
Filing date 
31.01.2019 (Thu) 
First day for validly paying third-year renewal fee 
31.07.2019 (Wed) 
Due date for third-year renewal fee under 
Rule 51(1)  
31.01.2020 (Fri) 
Last day for validly paying renewal fee plus 
additional fee (Rule 51(2)); see J 4/91, 
reasons 2.7 
30.04.2020 (Thu) 
First day for validly paying fourth-year renewal 
fee  
31.07.2020 (Fri) 
Due date for fourth-year renewal fee = last 
renewal fee to be paid to the EPO and last day 
for payment of this renewal fee without additional 
fee 
Art. 86(1) and 
Art. 141(1) 
Part A – Chapter X-10 

 
04.11.2020 (Wed)  
Mention of grant of the European patent in the 
European Patent Bulletin 
Example 1 of last renewal fee payable to the EPO: 
21.01.2017 (Sat) 
Filing date 
22.01.2019 (Tue) 
Start of third patent year 
31.01.2019 (Thu) 
Due date for third-year renewal fee (to be 
paid to the EPO) 
31.10.2019 (Thu) 
First day for validly paying fourth-year 
renewal fee 
15.01.2020 (Wed) 
Mention of grant of the European patent in 
the European Patent Bulletin 
22.01.2020 (Wed) 
Start of fourth patent year 
31.01.2020 (Fri) 
Due date for fourth-year renewal fee (no 
longer to be paid to the EPO; if already 
paid, to be refunded, see A-X, 10.1.1) 
This means that for the last renewal fee payable to the EPO, it is not the 
due date but the beginning of the respective patent year that is decisive. If 
the mention of the grant of the European patent is published on the 
anniversary of the filing date, the renewal fee in respect of the next patent 
year, which has not yet begun, is no longer payable to the EPO but to the 
national authorities. 
Example 2 of last renewal fee payable to the EPO: 
22.05.2017 (Mon) 
Filing date 
23.05.2019 (Thu) 
Start of third patent year 
31.05.2019 (Fri) 
Due date for third-year renewal fee (to be 
paid to the EPO) 
12.05.2022 (Thu) 
Date of dispatch of communication under 
Rule 71(3) 
20.05.2022 (Fri) 
Approval of the text for grant and translation 
of the claims submitted, fee for grant and 
publication and all claims paid 
23.05.2022 (Mon) 
Start of sixth patent year 
31.05.2022 (Tue) 
Due date for sixth-year renewal fee, payable 
to EPO (Rule 71a(4)) 
30.11.2022 (Wed) 
Payment of the sixth renewal fee with 
additional fee (Rule 51(2)) 
04.01.2023 (Wed) 
Mention of grant of the European patent in 
the European Patent Bulletin 
31.05.2023 (Wed) 
Due date for seventh-year renewal fee (no 
longer to be paid to the EPO) 
This means that, if the renewal fee in respect of the next patent year falls 
due after notification of the communication under Rule 71(3) and before the 
next possible date for publication of the mention of the grant of the 
European patent, the renewal fee is payable to the EPO (Rule 71a(4)). In 
that case, the mention of the grant will not be published until the renewal 
fee has been paid. If the renewal fee or any additional fee (Rule 51(2)) is 
not paid in time the application is deemed withdrawn. 
 

Part A – Chapter X-11 
Special provisions apply with regard to the due date for renewal fees in 
respect of cases where there is a successful request for re-establishment of 
rights under Art. 122 or a successful petition for review of a decision of the 
board of appeal under Art. 112a. 
5.2.5 Claims fees 
Claims fees are due upon filing the first set of claims, which may be the 
filing date or may occur later (see A-III, 9 and 15). 
5.2.6 Fees for limitation/revocation, opposition, appeal, petition for 
review 
All of these fees are due on the date that the document in question is filed 
(request for limitation, request for revocation, notice of opposition, notice of 
appeal and petition for review). 
5.2.7 Fees payable for procedural and other requests 
The fees payable for procedural requests are due as provided for in the 
Implementing Regulations. These requests become effective on payment of 
the prescribed fee, which thus falls due on the request's filing date. This is 
the case, for example, for the fee for further processing (Art. 121, 
Rule 135(1), see also E-VIII, 2) and the fee for re-establishment of rights 
(Art. 122, Rule 136(1), see also E-VIII, 3). Similarly, the fees payable for 
other requests, such as the fee for the registration of transfers (Rule 22(2)) 
and the administrative fees laid down by the EPO President in accordance 
with Art. 3 RFees, for instance, for issuing a priority document (Rule 54) or 
a certificate for a European patent (Rule 74), fall due on the request's filing 
date. 
6. Payment in due time 
6.1 Basic principle 
A fee is considered to have been paid in due time if the date of payment 
(see A-X, 4) fell on or before the last day of the relevant time limit – or the 
time limit extended under Rule 134. 
6.2 Late payment of fees – period for payment considered observed 
6.2.1 Fees paid by bank transfer – application of Art. 7(3) and 
(4) RFees 
If a fee paid by bank transfer enters the EPO's bank account after the 
period in which it should have been made, the period for payment of that 
fee is considered observed if the payer provides evidence to the EPO that 
they fulfilled one of the following conditions in an EPC contracting state 
within the period for payment of that fee: 
(i) 
payment of the fee was effected through a banking establishment 
(ii) 
an order was duly given to a banking establishment to transfer the 
amount of the payment. 
The EPO may ask the person who made the payment to produce evidence, 
within a period to be specified by it, as to the date on which one of the 
Rule 51(4) and (5) 
Art. 7(3) and 
(4) RFees 
Part A – Chapter X-12 

 
conditions mentioned above was fulfilled in order for the period for payment 
of the fee to be considered observed. 
Where the period for payment is considered observed in application of 
Art. 7(3) and (4) RFees, any further processing fee paid will be refunded 
(see A-X, 6.2.5). 
6.2.2 Safety provision for late replenishment of deposit accounts 
Where a payment to replenish the deposit account is considered to have 
been made after expiry of a period in which it should have been made 
(see A-X, 4.2.4), the EPO will consider the period as having been observed 
if evidence is provided that an adequate replenishment of the deposit 
account was authorised: 
(i) 
at least one day before expiry of the period for paying the fee if using 
the SEPA Credit Transfer scheme 
(ii) 
at the latest on the last day of the period for paying the fee if using 
the SEPA Instant Credit Transfer scheme 
(iii) 
at least three days before expiry of the period for paying the fee if 
any other type of order was given to a banking establishment within 
an EPC contracting state. 
Where the requirements under point 7.5.1 ADA are fulfilled, any further 
processing fee paid will be refunded (see A-X, 6.2.5). 
6.2.3 Debit orders filed with a competent national authority 
For debit orders accompanying applications filed with a competent national 
authority, see A-X, 4.2.4 and A-II, 1.5. 
6.2.4 Amount of fee payable 
As noted in A-X, 5.1.2, the amount of fee payable is always that applying 
on the date of payment (see also the transitional provisions in the 
Administrative Council decisions revising fees). Art. 7(3) and (4) RFees 
protects the applicant in the event of late payment from the legal 
consequences of expiry of the payment period but not from the obligation to 
make up any differences resulting from an increase in the amount of fee in 
the meantime. For debit orders accompanying applications filed with a 
competent national office (Art. 75(1)(b)), see point 12.3 of the ADA 
(Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2022). 
6.2.5 Noting of loss of rights 
If applicants who have been sent a communication under Rule 112(1) 
noting non-compliance with a payment time limit claim that the payment 
was made in due time under Art. 7(1), (3) and (4) RFees or in accordance 
with the safety provision for replenishment of deposit accounts, they must 
apply for a decision under Rule 112(2) and submit the requisite evidence. 
As an auxiliary request, applicants are advised to request further 
processing. 
Point 7.4.1 ADA 
Point 7.5.1 ADA 
Rule 112 
 

Part A – Chapter X-13 
7. Purpose of payment 
7.1 General 
7.1.1 Conditions for valid payment 
There are two conditions for a fee payment to be valid: 
(i) 
it must relate to pending proceedings 
(ii) 
it must be made in due time, i.e. the date of payment (see A-X, 4) 
must be on or after the due date (see A-X, 5.1.1). In addition, for a 
time limit for payment to be deemed observed, the full amount of the 
fee must have been paid in due time. 
An essential condition for a valid payment to the EPO in the case of 
payment or transfer to the bank account held by the European Patent 
Organisation is that the amount enters that account. The payment is valid in 
respect of the amount entering the account. If an insufficient amount has 
been paid by mistake, it is not possible to rectify the error by having the 
shortfall paid subsequently deemed paid on the original date of payment. 
The same applies to payments made via credit card. Payment is a matter of 
fact whereby a certain amount is transferred to and put at the disposal of 
the EPO. It is not, therefore, a document filed with the EPO or a procedural 
declaration that may be corrected under Rule 139. However, the EPO may, 
where it is considered justified, overlook any small amounts lacking without 
prejudice to the rights of the person making the payment (Art. 8 RFees). 
In the case of payment via deposit account, the essential condition, in 
addition to those specified under points (i)-(ii) above, is that the debit order 
clearly specifies the purpose of payment by indicating the fee intended to 
be paid, thus authorising the EPO to debit the fee for this particular 
purpose. Furthermore, the EPO can only debit the full amount of the fee if 
there are sufficient funds in the deposit account. In respect of 
underpayments due to incorrect information given in a debit order, see 
A-X, 4.2.3. See also A-X, 7.1.2 concerning corrections of the purpose of 
payment. 
7.1.2 Purpose of payment 
A distinction must be drawn between these conditions for valid payment 
(see A-X, 7.1.1) and the indication of the purpose of the payment. 
Indication of the purpose of the payment serves to identify the proceedings 
for which the fee is intended (e.g. for fee payments, the application number) 
and the specific type of fee. If the purpose of the payment cannot 
immediately be established, the person making the payment will be 
requested to communicate the purpose in writing within a specified period. 
If they comply with this request in due time, the payment and the original 
payment date remain valid. This is also the case when the clarification 
involves reassigning the payment to another application. Otherwise the 
payment will be considered not made. The boards of appeal have decided 
that if the purpose of the payment has evidently been given incorrectly, this 
deficiency is not prejudicial if the intended purpose can be established 
without difficulty from the remaining information. The inadvertent use of a 
Art. 8 RFees 
Art. 6 RFees 
Part A – Chapter X-14 

 
fee by the EPO for a different purpose from that evidently intended by the 
person making the payment has no effect on the purpose intended by that 
person (see J 16/84). Similarly, a debit order must be carried out 
notwithstanding incorrect information given in it if the intention of the person 
giving the order is clear. Instructions to carry out the order must be given by 
the EPO department qualified to recognise what is clearly intended 
(see T 152/82). 
In the case of changes to the purpose of payment not arising from 
Art. 6(2) RFees, the date of payment is the date of receipt of the request for 
the change. 
7.2 Indication of the purpose of the payment in the case of 
designation fees 
The following applies only to applications filed before 1 April 2009. 
The designation fees are deemed paid for all contracting states upon 
payment of seven times the amount of one designation fee. Such payments 
simply need to be marked "designation fees" in order for the purpose of the 
payment to be established. If fewer than seven designation fees are paid 
and the payment agrees with the declaration in the appropriate section of 
the request for grant form (EPO Form 1001), payment should once again 
simply be marked "designation fees". However, if the payment differs from 
the intended payment as stated on the request form, the contracting states 
for which the payment is now intended should be indicated with the 
payment. 
If there is no such indication and the amount paid is insufficient to cover all 
the contracting states mentioned in the appropriate section of the request 
form, the procedure under A-III, 11.3.7 applies. 
If an automatic debit order has been given, applicants must inform the EPO 
prior to expiry of the basic period under Rule 39(1) if they wish to pay 
designation fees for contracting states other than those indicated on the 
request form. If not, an amount equal to seven times the amount of one 
designation fee or the designation fees for the contracting states indicated 
on the request form is debited. 
The same applies for Euro-PCT applications that entered the European 
phase before 1 April 2009. 
7.3 Indication of the purpose of payment in the case of claims fees 
7.3.1 Claims fees payable on filing the European patent application 
If the applicant pays the claims fees for all the claims incurring fees, the 
indication "claims fees" suffices to identify the purpose of the payment. If 
the amount paid is insufficient to cover all the claims fees, the procedure 
under A-III, 9 applies. 
Art. 2(2), item 3, 
RFees 
Art. 6(1) RFees 
Rule 45(1) 
 

Part A – Chapter X-15 
7.3.2 Claims fees payable before the grant of the European patent 
In the communication under Rule 71(3), the applicant may be requested to 
pay claims fees due before the European patent is granted. If the applicant 
fails to pay the fee for all the claims in due time, the application is deemed 
withdrawn (Rule 71(7)). 
8. No deferred payment of fees, no legal aid, no discretion 
The EPC makes no provision for deferring payment of fees (see J 2/78, 
reasons 3) or for granting legal aid. An indigent party can still apply for legal 
aid from the competent national authority. However, the time limit for 
payment is not extended in such a case; a party claiming national legal aid 
must make the corresponding arrangements as early as possible so that 
they are in a position to pay the fee in due time. The EPO has no discretion 
in waiving or refunding, without any legal basis, fees that have become due 
(see J 20/87). 
9. Reduction of fees 
9.1 General 
Where a fee reduction applies, the reduced rate may be paid instead of the 
full fee. The factual conditions for a reduction of the fee must be met on the 
day the payment is made. 
9.2 Reduction under the language arrangements 
9.2.1 Conditions 
European patent applications can be filed in any language. If filed in a 
language other than an official EPO language, a translation must be 
furnished. Consequently, the languages that can be used for filing 
European patent applications fall into three categories: 
(a) 
official EPO languages 
(b) 
official languages of contracting states other than English, French or 
German, such as Dutch, Italian or Spanish ("admissible non-EPO 
languages") 
(c) 
all other languages, such as Chinese, Japanese or Korean. 
Furthermore, documents that have to be filed within a time limit may also 
be filed in an admissible non-EPO language if the applicant's residence or 
principal place of business is within the territory of a contracting state 
having the language in question as an official language or if the applicant is 
a national of such a contracting state (see A-VII, 1.1 and 1.2). 
In the case of European patent applications filed on or after 1 April 2014 a 
30% reduction of the filing and/or examination fee for certain categories of 
applicants is provided for. For international applications entering the 
European phase on or after 1 April 2014, a 30% reduction of the 
examination fee is provided for (see the notice from the EPO dated 
10 January 2014, OJ EPO 2014, A23). In this regard, it is necessary to file 
the documents making up the application "as filed" and/or the request for 
Rule 71(4) 
Art. 14(2) 
Art. 14(4) 
Rule 6(3) 
Art. 14(1) RFees 
Part A – Chapter X-16 

 
examination in an admissible non-EPO language, and to file the translation 
not earlier than simultaneously (see G 6/91). 
The categories of applicants eligible for the fee reductions are: 
– 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
– 
natural persons 
– 
non-profit 
organisations, 
universities 
and 
public 
research 
organisations 
whose residence or principal place of business is in an EPC contracting 
state with an official language other than English, French or German, and 
nationals of such states who are resident abroad. 
The definition of SMEs is that contained in European Commission 
Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 as published in the Official 
Journal of the European Union. Under the recommendation, an enterprise 
is considered to be any entity engaged in an economic activity, irrespective 
of its legal form. The category of micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises is made up of enterprises employing fewer than 250 persons, 
having an annual turnover not exceeding EUR 50 million and/or an annual 
balance sheet total not exceeding EUR 43 million and for which no more 
than 25% of the capital is held directly or indirectly by another company that 
is not an SME. 
The eligibility of the further entities listed in Rule 6(4) is subject to the 
following definitions: 
(i) 
"Non-profit organisations" are organisations not allowed by their legal 
form or statutes, under the relevant law, to be a source of income, 
profit or other financial gain to their owners, or – if allowed to make a 
profit – there is a legal or statutory obligation to reinvest the profits 
made in the interest of the organisation. 
(ii) 
"Universities" are to be understood as "classical" universities, 
meaning institutions of higher education and research, under the 
relevant law. However, comparable entities, such as secondary or 
higher education establishments, will be considered to be 
universities. 
(iii) 
"Public research organisations" are entities such as universities or 
research institutes that are organised under public law and, 
irrespective of how they are financed, have the primary goal of 
conducting fundamental research, industrial research or experimental 
development and of disseminating the results by way of teaching, 
publication or technology transfer. All profits must be reinvested in 
carrying out these activities, in disseminating the results or in 
teaching. 
Rule 6(4) 
Rule 6(5) 
 

Part A – Chapter X-17 
If there are multiple applicants, each one must be an entity or a natural 
person within the meaning of Rule 6(4) for the fee reduction to apply; it is 
however sufficient for only one of them to be entitled to use an admissible 
non-EPO language (Art. 14(4), Rule 6(3)). 
Applicants wishing to benefit from the reduction in the filing or examination 
fee under Art. 14(1) RFees must expressly declare that they are an entity or 
natural person covered by Rule 6(4). 
Changes in the status of an entity under Rule 6(4) occurring after filing the 
declaration will not have a retroactive effect on fee reductions that were 
justified when granted. 
The EPO will conduct checks to ensure compliance with the eligibility 
criteria laid down in Rule 6(3) to (7). If the checks give rise to reasonable 
doubt in the course of the grant proceedings as to the veracity of the 
declaration given by the applicant, the EPO may request appropriate 
evidence. 
Should it become apparent that an incorrect declaration has been filed, the 
fee would not be validly paid since it was reduced unjustifiably and the 
application may be deemed withdrawn under Art. 78(2) and/or 94(2). The 
same applies if no declaration has been filed. Where applicable, the loss of 
rights arising from an incorrect or missing declaration may be remedied by 
filing a request for further processing under Art. 121 and Rule 135 – subject 
to making good any underpayment and paying the fee for further 
processing (see E-VIII, 2) – or by requesting a decision under Rule 112(2) 
(see E-VIII, 1.9.3). 
In respect of European patent applications, oppositions, appeals, petitions 
for review or requests for limitation or revocation filed before 1 April 2014 
and international applications having entered the European phase before 
that date, the fee reduction in force until then was applied. 
9.2.2 Reduction of the filing fee 
On filing a European patent application, the presence of a description is 
necessary for the accordance of a filing date (Rule 40(1)(c)). The 
description, therefore, needs to be in an admissible non-EPO language to 
qualify for the fee reduction (not the request for grant, for example; see 
J 4/88). 
Consequently, the filing fee is reduced if the European patent application 
(i.e. at least the description) is filed in an admissible non-EPO language 
and the applicant satisfies the eligibility criteria mentioned in A-X, 9.2.1. 
Where the application is filed by reference to a previously filed application 
(see A-II, 4.1.3.1), and the previously filed application referred to is in an 
admissible non-EPO language, and the applicant satisfies the eligibility 
criteria mentioned in A-X, 9.2.1, then the applicant is also entitled to the 
reduction in the filing fee. For the purposes of the reduction, it does not 
matter whether the applicant requested that the claims of the previously 
Rule 6(7) 
Rule 6(6) 
Part A – Chapter X-18 

 
filed application take the place of the claims in the application as filed (see 
above). 
The reduction of the filing fee is also applicable to divisional applications if 
the parent application was filed in an admissible non-EPO language 
(see A-IV, 1.3.3 and A-X, 9.2.1) and the divisional application is filed in the 
same admissible non-EPO language as the earlier application (Rule 36(2) 
and Rule 6(3)), provided that the other requirements for the reduction are 
met (see above) and a translation is filed in time (see A-X, 9.2.1). 
Since the additional fees that are payable if the application either comprises 
more than 35 pages or is a second- or further generation divisional 
application form part of the filing fee, the reduction applies also to them. 
9.2.3 Reduction of the examination fee 
Applicants eligible for the fee reduction will be allowed a reduction in the 
examination fee if the request for examination is filed in an admissible 
non-EPO language. EPO Forms 1001 (Request for grant of a European 
patent) and 1200 (Entry into the European phase) contain drop-down 
menus/pre-printed boxes where the request for examination in an 
admissible non-EPO language and the declaration under Rule 6(6) can be 
selected/entered. In these cases, the filing of a translation of the request is 
not necessary, since the written request for examination in the three EPO 
official languages is preselected in the same forms. Wordings for the 
request for examination in the admissible non-EPO languages are listed on 
the EPO website. Where the request for examination in an admissible 
non-EPO language is filed subsequent to EPO Form 1001 or EPO Form 
1200, a translation of the request for examination in the procedural 
languages must be refiled (see G 6/91). Subsequent documents related to 
examination proceedings need not be filed in the admissible non-EPO 
language. 
If the conditions for the reduction of the examination fee where the EPO 
has drawn up the international preliminary examination report are also 
fulfilled, see A-X, 9.3.2. 
9.3 Special reductions 
9.3.1 Reduction of the search fee for a supplementary European 
search 
The search fee for a supplementary European search report is reduced by 
a fixed amount for PCT applications for which the patent office of Austria, 
Finland, Spain, Sweden or Türkiye, the Nordic Patent Institute or the 
Visegrad Patent Institute was the International Searching Authority or 
where one of these offices prepared the supplementary international search 
report (see the Administrative Council decisions of 27 October 2011, 
OJ EPO 2011, 616; 25 October 2012, OJ EPO 2012, 584; 16 December 
2015, OJ EPO 2016, A2; 28 June 2017, OJ EPO 2017, A57; 12 December 
2019, OJ EPO 2020, A3; 15 December 2021, OJ EPO 2022, A2; and 
14 December 2022, OJ EPO 2023, A25). 
Art. 14(4) 
Rule 6 
Art. 153(7) 
 

Part A – Chapter X-19 
Where the requirements for fee reduction are fulfilled, the fee reduction is 
granted only once, i.e. for the supplementary search fee paid under 
Rule 159(1)(e). The reduction applies independently of whether the first 
invention in the claims was searched by the ISA in the international phase. 
The reduction does not apply to any further search fee (to be) paid under 
Rule 164(1). 
No reduction of the supplementary search fee applies for PCT applications 
for which an International Searching Authority other than the ones 
mentioned above was selected. For the latest overview of the amounts 
payable, 
see 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
6 March 2023, 
OJ EPO 2023, A28. 
9.3.2 Reduction of the examination fee where the international 
preliminary examination report is drawn up by the EPO 
Where the EPO has drawn up the international preliminary examination 
report in respect of an international application, the examination fee is 
reduced by 75% in proceedings before the EPO as elected Office. 
Accordingly, the reduction applies to the Euro-PCT application entering the 
European phase. The reduction of the examination fee does not apply to 
divisional applications for whose parent application the EPO has drawn up 
the international preliminary examination report. 
If the conditions for a reduction under the language arrangements 
(see A-X, 9.2.3) are also fulfilled, the examination fee is first reduced by 
75%, then by a further 30%, i.e. the total reduction is 82.5%, or the amount 
payable is 17.5% of the full fee. 
10. Refund of fees 
10.1 General remarks 
A fee that has been validly paid (see A-X, 7.1.1) is not refunded. For 
instance, a validly paid further processing fee is not refunded if the request 
for further processing is rejected due to non-completion of the omitted act, 
which is another requirement of Rule 135(1) (see E-VIII, 2). As an 
exception to this general principle, a validly paid fee is refunded if there are 
special provisions for the refund in either the EPC or the Rules relating to 
Fees (see A-X, 2). 
By contrast, any fee that has not been validly paid is to be refunded (see 
A-X, 10.1.1 to A-X, 10.1.3 below). 
10.1.1 Fee payments lacking a legal basis 
If a payment does not relate to a pending European patent application 
(e.g. it relates to a patent application already deemed withdrawn) or to 
pending proceedings, there is no legal basis for the payment. In these 
cases, the amount paid must be refunded. 
If the payment is made before or on the due date and if, no later than that 
date, the legal basis ceases to exist (e.g. because the patent application is 
deemed withdrawn or is withdrawn), the amount paid is to be refunded. For 
the designation fee and renewal fees ,see A-X, 5.2.2 and 5.2.4 
Art. 14(2) RFees 
Part A – Chapter X-20 

 
respectively. Fees paid after the due date and before expiry of the time limit 
for payment are refunded only if there is a particular reason for a refund 
(see A-X, 10.2). 
10.1.2 Late payments 
The payment of a fee after expiry of the applicable time limit is not valid and 
must be refunded unless a valid request for further processing has been 
filed. Examples: filing fee, search fee, designation fee or examination fee 
paid as laid down under the provisions relating to further processing 
(Art. 121 and Rule 135), without the further processing fee required by 
Rule 135(1) and Art. 2(1), item 12, RFees (see E-VIII, 2). 
10.1.3 Insignificant amounts 
Where the sum paid is larger than the fee, the excess will not be refunded if 
the amount is insignificant and the party concerned has not expressly 
requested a refund. It has been decided that any amount up to EUR 17 
constitutes an insignificant amount (see the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 7 March 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A27). 
10.2 Special refunds 
10.2.1 Refund of the search fee 
The search fee for a European or supplementary European search is 
refunded in the cases provided for in Art. 9 RFees and in the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 17 January 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A4, which 
applies to European patent applications in respect of which the European 
or supplementary European search is completed on or after 1 April 2023. 
Details on criteria for refund of search fees are given in the notice from the 
EPO dated 9 January 2009, OJ EPO 2009, 99, according to which the 
search division will determine the level of refund to be applied. In the event 
of disagreement, the applicant may request an appealable decision 
(Art. 106(2)), which is issued by the Receiving Section where the examining 
division has not yet assumed responsibility for the application (Rule 10) 
(see B-XI, 2). 
For the purposes of Art. 9(1) RFees, the date of the start of the search is 
indicated by means of EPO Form 1704 in the public part of the dossier and 
is thus open to file inspection in the European Patent Register after the 
patent application's publication (see also B-IV, 1). Before publication, the 
EPO will provide the applicant with the relevant information upon request, 
or this information can be accessed electronically via the MyEPO Portfolio 
and My Files services. 
10.2.2 Refund of the further search fee 
If an applicant has paid a further search fee following a communication 
from the search division under Rule 64(2) but the examining division finds, 
on request, that the communication was not justified, the further search fee 
will be refunded. The same principle applies if the applicant has paid a 
search fee on the basis of an invitation by the examining division under 
Rule 164(2) (see C-III, 3.1). In such cases, the examining division will, on 
request, review the justification for charging the search fee in its invitation 
under Rule 164(2) (see C-III, 3.4). 
Art. 12 RFees 
Art. 9 RFees 
Rule 10 
Rule 64(2), 
164(5) 
 

Part A – Chapter X-21 
10.2.3 Refund of the examination fee 
The examination fee will be refunded in the situations described in 
Art. 11 RFees (see A-VI, 2.2, third paragraph, and A-VI, 2.5). 
10.2.4 Refund under Rule 37(2) 
If a European patent application filed with a competent national authority is 
deemed withdrawn under Art. 77(3), all fees, in particular the filing, search 
and designation fees and any claims fees paid, will be refunded. 
10.2.5 Refund of the fee for grant and publishing 
If the application is refused, withdrawn prior to notification of the decision 
on the grant of a European patent or, at that time, deemed withdrawn, the 
fee for grant and publishing will be refunded. The date of the decision's 
notification is determined as indicated in E-II, 2. Note that this date is later 
than the date on which the decision is handed over to the EPO internal 
postal service (i.e. decision G 12/91 does not apply in this case). 
This may happen, for example, where the applicant pays the fee for grant 
and publishing within the Rule 71(3) period but does not pay the claims 
fees due and/or neglects to file the translations of the claims leading to 
deemed withdrawal of the application under Rule 71(7) (see C-V, 3). 
Where the application is refused, the refund will be effected only after the 
period for filing an appeal has expired without an appeal being filed 
(see E-XII, 6). Where the application is deemed withdrawn, the refund will 
be effected only after the period for requesting further processing has 
expired without further processing being requested by the applicant 
(see E-VIII, 2). 
10.2.6 Refund of the appeal fee 
The appeal fee may be refunded in full or in part in some specific situations 
provided for in Rule 103. However, the department of first instance is only 
competent to decide on and order a full refund of the appeal fee in the case 
of an interlocutory revision if it considers the reimbursement equitable by 
reason of a substantial procedural violation (Rule 103(1)(a)). 
In all other situations, reimbursement of the appeal fee, in part or in full, is 
decided on by the board of appeal. 
10.3 Method of refund 
Refunds are made either to a deposit account held with the EPO or by 
transfer to a bank account (see the notice from the EPO dated 
27 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A26). Refunds are not made to a credit 
card account (see the notice from the EPO dated 16 February 2022, 
OJ EPO 2022, A18). 
10.3.1 Refunds to a deposit account 
Fees are refunded to any deposit account that the applicant, proprietor or 
opponent/appellant (if applicant or proprietor) has indicated in its refund 
instructions. In most cases this will be the deposit account of the party to 
the proceedings itself, but it may also be a third party's deposit account. 
The EPO notifies the party to the proceedings about the intended refund 
Art. 11 RFees 
Rule 37(2) 
Rule 71a(6) 
Rule 103 
Point 15 ADA 
Part A – Chapter X-22 

 
and the deposit account to which the amount will be credited in a separate 
communication. 
Refund instructions, i.e. to which deposit account refunds are to be made, 
are to be filed in an electronically processable format (XML) via EPO Online 
Filing or Online Filing 2.0, using EPO Form 1001E, 1200E or 1038E, 
preferably as early as possible in the proceedings before the EPO. Refund 
instructions submitted in any other way, e.g. on paper, by fax, via the EPO 
web-form filing service or the EPO Contingency Upload Service, are invalid 
and will not be processed. Refund instructions can be updated at any time 
using EPO Form 1038E. 
For international applications filed with the EPO as receiving Office or for 
which the EPO acted as an International Authority under the PCT, new 
refund instructions are to be filed when entering the European phase using 
EPO Form 1200E. 
In the case of a request for a change of representative or a transfer of 
rights, new refund instructions, if applicable, should be submitted as soon 
as possible using EPO Form 1038E, preferably together with the request. 
The updated refund instructions will apply only once the EPO has 
confirmed the change's recording. If no new refund instructions are present, 
a deposit account recorded for an applicant or representative who has 
withdrawn from the proceedings will be deleted by the EPO on its own 
initiative. The same applies to the deposit account held by a third party 
indicated in the refund instructions of the former applicant or representative. 
If no refund instructions are on file when a refund becomes due or if they 
are ambiguous, the EPO will on its own initiative establish whether it can 
make a refund to a deposit account held by the appointed professional 
representative or by the applicant (or appellant, if applicant/proprietor). 
Otherwise it will invite the person who made the payment to claim the 
refund online. 
In the case of a refund of fees not payable by the applicant, proprietor or 
appellant (if applicant or proprietor), e.g. the opposition fee, the EPO will on 
its own initiative establish whether the refund can be credited to a deposit 
account. Otherwise it will invite the person who made the payment to claim 
the refund online. 
10.3.2 Refunds to a bank account 
If a refund cannot be made to a deposit account, the party to the 
proceedings is invited to claim the refund online via the EPO website 
(epo.org) using a refund code provided in a non-public communication. 
Upon successful registration and sign in, the refund can be claimed by 
entering the application's details, the refund code and a bank account. 
10.4 Reallocation instead of refund 
If a party files a written request, the payment may be reallocated instead of 
being refunded. The date of receipt of the reallocation instructions is then 
considered the payment date for the new purpose of payment. 
 

Part A – Chapter X-23 
11. Crediting of fees under Rule 71a(5) 
If, in response to an invitation under Rule 71(3), the applicant has already 
paid the fee for grant and publishing or the claims fees, the amount paid will 
be credited if a further such invitation is issued. This may happen where: 
(i) 
the applicant requests amendments or corrections in response to the 
first Rule 71(3) communication or requests the reversal of 
amendments 
proposed 
by 
the 
examining 
division 
in 
that 
communication (see C-V, 4.1) and also voluntarily pays the fee for 
grant and publishing and claims fees (even though this is not 
required, C-V, 4.2) and the examining division then issues a 
subsequent Rule 71(3) communication (see C-V, 4.6 and 4.7.2) 
(ii) 
after the applicant has approved the text for grant in response to the 
first Rule 71(3) communication (which requires payment of the fee for 
grant and publishing and any claims fees due – see C-V, 1.1), 
examination is resumed (see C-V, 6.1) leading to a subsequent 
Rule 71(3) communication being issued (see C-V, 6.2). 
11.1 Crediting of the fee for grant and publishing 
The amount of the fee for grant and publishing paid in response to the first 
Rule 71(3) communication is credited towards the amount of this same fee 
due in response to the second Rule 71(3) communication. If this fee 
increases between the first and second Rule 71(3) communications, the 
difference must be paid within the period for reply to the second Rule 71(3) 
communication. 
For European patent applications filed before 1 April 2009 or international 
applications entering the European phase before that date, the fee for grant 
and publishing incorporates a fixed component and a component in respect 
of each page of the application in excess of 35 (see C-V, 1.2 and 
A-III, 13.2). If the overall fee changes between the first and second 
Rule 71(3) communication, any shortfall must be paid within the second 
Rule 71(3) period (e.g. resulting from a fee increase or an increase in the 
number of pages). Any excess will be refunded (for example where the 
version of the application on which the second Rule 71(3) communication is 
based has fewer pages than the earlier version on which the first 
Rule 71(3) communication was based). 
11.2 Crediting of claims fees 
The amount of the claims fees paid in response to the first Rule 71(3) 
communication is credited towards the amount of the claims fees due in 
response to the second Rule 71(3) communication. In this regard it is 
important to note that, unlike claims fees paid on filing under Rule 45 or on 
entry into the European phase under Rule 162, it is not the number of 
claims paid for that is used in the calculation but rather the amount paid. 
If the amount of the claims fees due increases between the first and second 
Rule 71(3) communications (e.g. because of an increase in the per-claim 
fee or in the number of claims or both), the difference must be paid within 
the period for reply to the second Rule 71(3) communication. 
Rule 71a(5) 
Art. 2(2), 
item 7, RFees 
Part A – Chapter X-24 

 
To calculate the amount of the claims fees due in response to the second 
Rule 71(3) communication, the number of fee-free claims (15) and also the 
number of claims fees paid on filing or on entry into the European phase 
are deducted from the number of claims on which both the first and second 
Rule 71(3) communications are based. Thereafter, the amount of the 
claims fees paid in response to the first Rule 71(3) communication is then 
credited towards (and so deducted from) the amount of the claims fees due 
in response to the second Rule 71(3) communication (if the amount of fees 
due after the second Rule 71(3) communication is smaller than that 
voluntarily paid after the first Rule 71(3) communication, see C-V, 4.2). 
11.3 Separate crediting of the fee for grant and publishing and claims 
fees 
The crediting of claims fees and the fee for grant and publishing is dealt 
with separately. Claims fees are not credited towards any increase in the 
fee for grant and publishing. 
11.4 Further processing fee and crediting of fees 
Where the applicant has requested further processing in respect of the first 
Rule 71(3) communication (see E-VIII, 2), the further processing fee is not 
credited towards any increase in the amount of the fees due in response to 
the second Rule 71(3) communication. 
Nor is the further processing fee paid in respect of the first Rule 71(3) 
communication credited towards any subsequent request for further 
processing in respect of the second Rule 71(3) communication. 
 

Part A – Chapter XI-1 
Chapter XI – Inspection of files; communication 
of information contained in files; consultation of 
the European Patent Register; issue of certified 
copies 
1. General 
After a European patent application has been published, any person may 
inspect and obtain information from the files relating to the application and 
the resultant European patent. Similarly, anybody may request the issue of 
a sample of biological material in accordance with Rule 33 (see A-IV, 4.4). 
The provisions governing file inspection are contained in Art. 128 and 
Rules 144 and 145 (see A-XI, 2); those governing communication of 
information are contained in Rule 146 (see A-XI, 3). For international (PCT) 
applications, see E-IX, 2.10. 
The European Patent Register, containing the particulars specified in 
Rule 143 and accessible free of charge, can be consulted to ascertain the 
state of the proceedings and the legal status of patent rights. It also 
provides access to the files of published European patent applications and 
patents for inspection (see A-XI, 4). The inspection of paper files on the 
premises of the European Patent Office was discontinued in 2007. 
On request, the EPO issues certified copies of documents contained in the 
files or of other documents (see A-XI, 5). 
Any fees payable for any of the above services are laid down by the 
President under Art. 3(1) RFees and are regularly published in the Official 
Journal. See also the schedule of fees and expenses on the EPO website 
(epo.org). 
An administrative fee, if any, falls due when the request is received. The 
methods of payment and the date on which payment is deemed made are 
dealt with in the Rules relating to Fees (see A-X, 2 and 4). Where the 
administrative fee has been duly paid, it will not be refunded 
(see A-X, 10.1). 
2. Inspection of files 
2.1 Documents open to file inspection 
All parts of the file compiled when conducting the examination, opposition 
and appeal procedure with the parties are open for inspection, subject to 
the restrictions mentioned below (see A-XI, 2.3). This includes information 
on the dates of the start of search and examination, any invitations under 
Rule 63(1) or Rule 62a(1) and the search opinion, if applicable. 
As regards application documents corrected under Rule 56a, see A-II, 6 
and the notice from the EPO dated 23 July 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A71.  
Art. 128 
Rule 143, Rule 144 
Rule 145, Rule 146 
Art. 3(1) RFees 
Art. 128 
Rule 145(2) 
Rule 147(2) 
Part A – Chapter XI-2 

 
Observations by third parties (Art. 115) are an integral part of the files and 
as such are open to inspection in accordance with Art. 128. A request by a 
third party to treat their observations or part of them confidentially cannot 
be granted. In such a case, the third party will be notified accordingly 
(see E-VI, 3). 
The parts of the file excluded from inspection (see A-XI, 2.3) are kept 
separate from those open to inspection. 
2.2 Conducting file inspections 
The EPO President determines all file inspection arrangements, including 
the circumstances in which an administrative fee is payable (see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, 
OJ EPO 2019, A16). 
As a rule, published patent applications and granted patents can be 
inspected in the European Patent Register, which is accessible free of 
charge via the EPO website. In exceptional cases, and only if accompanied 
by a substantiated request, uncertified paper copies of files or uncertified 
extracts from the European Patent Register are still issued. The 
corresponding administrative fees have been abolished (see the notice 
from the EPO dated 20 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A15, and the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, 
OJ EPO 2019, A16). 
Regarding requests to furnish certified copies of documents from the file or 
a certified extract from the European Patent Register, see A-XI, 5. 
2.3 Restrictions to file inspection 
Inspection of files is subject to the restrictions laid down in Rule 144. 
The parts of the file excluded from inspection are: 
(i) 
the documents relating to the exclusion of or objections to members 
of the boards of appeal or of the Enlarged Board of Appeal 
(ii) 
draft decisions and opinions, and all other documents used for the 
preparation of decisions and opinions, which are not communicated 
to the parties 
(iii) 
the designation of the inventor if that party has waived the right to be 
mentioned as inventor under Rule 20(1) 
(iv) 
any other document excluded from inspection by the EPO President 
on the ground that such inspection would not serve the purpose of 
informing the public about the European patent application or the 
resulting patent; these include documents relating to file inspection 
and requests for accelerated search and accelerated examination 
under the "PACE" programme (see the decision of the President of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
12 July 2007, 
Special 
edition 
No. 3, 
OJ EPO 2007, J.3) 
Rule 145(2) 
Art. 3(1) RFees 
Art. 128(4) 
Rule 146 
Rule 145 
Rule 144 
Rule 144(a) 
Rule 144(b) 
Rule 144(c) 
Rule 144(d) 
 

Part A – Chapter XI-3 
(v) 
subject to Rule 94.2 and 94.3 PCT, the files relating to international 
preliminary examination for a Euro-PCT application in respect of 
which the EPO is the International Preliminary Examining Authority 
and for which an international preliminary examination report has not 
yet been established (see OJ EPO 2003, 382; see also E-IX, 2.10). 
Apart from listing the documents automatically excluded from file inspection 
by the EPO, the decision of the President referred to under point (iv) above 
stipulates that, on request, (parts of) other documents may be excluded 
from file inspection where their inspection is claimed to be prejudicial to the 
legitimate personal or economic interests of a natural or legal person. Any 
such request needs to be duly substantiated and specify how the legitimate 
personal or economic interests of the party are affected and what the 
relevant consequences are rather than merely making a statement 
concerning a party's interests in general. Also, any requests for exclusion 
from file inspection should be clearly marked, allowing them to be 
immediately identified as such and to be provisionally excluded from 
inspection, pending a final decision on the request. 
When a submission is to be excluded from file inspection only partially, only 
the parts or passages in question are excluded; the rest of the submission 
remains public. 
If it is decided that certain papers, either marked "confidential" or in view of 
the nature of their content, are not to be excluded from file inspection under 
Rule 144, they are returned to the sender (see T 516/89). 
2.4 Confidentiality of the request 
Correspondence in proceedings relating to the inspection of files conducted 
between the EPO and the person requesting the inspection is included in 
the non-public part of the file. The EPO does not provide the applicant with 
any information about the proceedings relating to the inspection of files 
(see A-XI, 2.3(iv) but also A-XI, 2.5, third paragraph). 
2.5 File inspection before publication of the application 
Until the European patent application is published, the files may be 
inspected only by applicants or with their consent. The MyEPO Portfolio 
and My Files services allow applicants to inspect the public part of the files 
relating to their still unpublished applications (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO and notice from the EPO both dated 9 October 2023 
concerning 
the 
web-based 
online 
service 
MyEPO 
Portfolio, 
OJ EPO 2023, A89, and OJ EPO 2023, A90, respectively, as well as the 
notice from the EPO dated 3 May 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A50, and the notice 
from the EPO dated 13 December 2011, OJ EPO 2012, 22). If a third party 
requests file inspection without at the same time submitting the applicant's 
consent, the EPO will not release the files until the applicant's approval has 
been presented. 
However, prior to the European patent application's publication, any person 
who can prove that applicants have invoked their rights under the 
application against them may also inspect the files. The rights under a 
European patent application are also deemed to have been invoked where 
Art. 38(1) PCT 
Rule 94 PCT 
Art. 128(1) 
Art. 128(2) 
Part A – Chapter XI-4 

 
rights under a first filing in a contracting state have been invoked and the 
subsequent European patent application is mentioned at the same time 
(see J 14/91). If such proof is not furnished together with the request, the 
EPO will invite the requester within a specified period to supply proof. If that 
is not done in due time, the request will be refused. 
If a request for inspection of the files under Art. 128(2) is made, the 
applicant is entitled to notification of the identity of the person making the 
request. Professional representatives requesting inspection of the files on 
behalf of a third party under Art. 128(2) must therefore give the third party's 
name and address and file an authorisation. 
A decision on a request for inspection of the files under Art. 128(2) is only 
taken once the applicant has been heard. If the applicant objects and 
provides grounds for believing that the requirements under Art. 128(2) are 
not met within the period set by the EPO, a decision will be delivered. This 
decision is subject to appeal. 
Prior to a European divisional application's publication the file of this 
divisional application may be inspected only in the cases described in 
Art. 128(1) and (2). This also applies where the parent application has 
already been published. However, where a European divisional application 
or a new European patent application filed under Art. 61(1)(b) is published, 
the files of the earlier application may be inspected prior to that earlier 
application's publication and without the relevant applicant's consent. 
2.6 Publication of bibliographic data before publication of the 
application 
In accordance with Art. 128(5), the EPO publishes in the European Patent 
Bulletin the bibliographic data relating to European patent applications that 
had been announced for publication but for which the application 
documents were not published, either because the application was 
withdrawn or because the announcement was erroneous. The lists of these 
publication numbers can be found on the European publication server, 
which is accessible via the EPO website (epo.org). 
3. Communication of information contained in the files 
Subject to the restrictions provided for in Art. 128(1) to (4) and Rule 144 
(see A-XI, 2.3), the EPO may, upon request, communicate information 
concerning any file of a published European patent application or a 
European patent. This is subject to the payment of an administrative fee 
(see A-XI, 1 and OJ EPO 2019, A14 and A15). 
However, the EPO may refer to the option to obtain inspection of the file 
itself, should it deem this to be appropriate in view of the quantity of 
information to be supplied. 
Correspondence in proceedings relating to the communication of 
information conducted between the EPO and the person requesting the 
information is filed in the part of the file that is not accessible to the public. 
The EPO does not provide the applicant with any information about the 
proceedings relating to the communication of information. 
Art. 128(3) 
Art. 128(5) 
Rule 146 
 

Part A – Chapter XI-5 
4. Consultation of the European Patent Register 
The European Patent Register can be accessed free of charge via the EPO 
website (epo.org) (see A-XI, 2.2). Entries in the European Patent Register 
are made starting from the publication of the European patent application 
up to expiry of the period of opposition or the termination of opposition 
proceedings. Where applicable, the date and purport of any decision taken 
in revocation or limitation proceedings (Art. 105b(2)) and/or on a petition for 
review (Art. 112a) are also included (Rule 143(1)(x) and (y)). Since the 
correction of the designation of the inventor may be made at any time 
(see A-III, 5.5), there is no time restriction for related entries in the 
European Patent Register. 
Apart from the data to be entered under Rule 143(1), the European Patent 
Register includes, under Rule 143(2), additional application and procedural 
data not published in the European Patent Bulletin (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 15 July 2014, OJ EPO 2014, A86). Register 
data may also be obtained by telephone from Customer Services: 
epo.org/service-support/contact-us.html. In exceptional cases, an extract 
from the Register will be provided on receipt of a substantiated request 
(see OJ EPO 2019, A15). 
5. Issue of certified copies 
5.1 Certified copies of documents from the files or of other 
documents 
The EPO will issue on request a certified copy of the European patent 
application or European patent specification, or of other documents from 
the files of European patent applications and patents (e.g. an extract from 
the European Patent Register), provided that the conditions for file 
inspection (Art. 128(1) to (4)) are fulfilled and an administrative fee has 
been paid (see A-XI, 1 and OJ EPO 2023, A3). 
A certified copy of the European patent certificate with specification 
attached is supplied to the patent proprietor on request (see C-V, 12). 
5.2 Priority documents issued by the EPO 
Any priority document (i.e. the certified copy of the European patent 
application together with the certificate stating its filing date) will only be 
issued to the (original) applicant or that party's successor in title on written 
request. If such request is missing, the EPO will invite the requester to file it 
and will supply the certified copy only once this requirement has been 
fulfilled. In the case of applications filed in a language other than an official 
EPO language (Art. 14(2)), the priority document relates to the application 
as originally filed, not to the translation in one of the official EPO languages. 
The EPO President determines all necessary arrangements, including the 
form of the priority document and the circumstances in which an 
administrative fee is payable (see A-XI, 1 and the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 20 February 2019 on the inspection of files, 
OJ EPO 2019, A16). The content of priority documents corresponds to the 
application documents as available on the filing date and as contained in 
Art. 127 
Rule 143 
Rule 21(2) 
Rule 74 
Rule 54 
Part A – Chapter XI-6 

 
the electronic file, reproduced in black and white (see A-IX, 1.2 and 7.1 and 
the notice from the EPO dated 14 January 2020, OJ EPO 2020, A7). 
Where a European patent application claims the priority of a previous 
European patent application or an international application filed with the 
EPO as receiving Office under the PCT, a certified copy of the previous 
application will be included in the file free of charge. Furthermore, if the 
patent office at which a European priority document is to be filed 
participates in the WIPO Digital Access Service (DAS), it is possible for that 
office to retrieve the European priority document free of charge via DAS by 
providing the access code that the EPO generates for every European 
patent application filed with it and every international application filed with 
the EPO as receiving Office (see also A-III, 6.7).  
 

Part B – Chapter I-1 
Chapter I – Introduction 
1. Scope of Part B 
Part B is about European searches, i.e. searches the EPO search divisions 
perform for European patent applications. They also carry out other types 
of search (see B-II, 4.4 to B-II, 4.6). These include searches under the 
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which are dealt with in the PCT Search 
and Examination Guidelines and in Part B of the Guidelines for Search and 
Examination at the EPO as PCT Authority. 
2. Search division 
The search division is responsible for: 
– 
drafting extended European search reports, i.e. European search 
reports under Art. 92 and accompanying search opinions under 
Rule 62(1) 
– 
drafting all of the different types of search report referred to in B-I, 1 
and B-II, 4 
– 
issuing any invitation under Rule 62a(1) (see also B-VIII, 4) to clarify 
– or, where necessary, limit the subject-matter to be searched 
– 
issuing any invitation under Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3.1).  
In cases of lack of unity, it also draws up a partial search report and a 
provisional opinion on the patentability of the invention or unitary group of 
inventions first mentioned in the claims (see F-V, 3.4), which includes the 
reasons for the non-unity findings, and issues an invitation to pay further 
search fees under Rule 64(1) or Rule 164(1) (see B-VII, 1.2 and B-XI, 5). 
The member of the search division responsible for the search on a 
European application is normally also the first member of the examining 
division for that application. 
2.1 Consultation with other examiners 
The search division may consult other examiners for advice on various 
issues, for example: 
(i) 
searching in databases it is not familiar with 
(ii) 
understanding aspects of the claimed invention outside its area of 
technical expertise 
(iii) 
devising a search strategy (see also B-I, 2.2) 
(iv) 
assessing the relevance of a prior-art document for determining the 
patentability of claimed subject-matter (see B-X, 9.2). 
2.2 Search division has more than one member 
A special search division consisting of two, or possibly even three, 
members may be formed where the nature of the invention makes it 
Art. 17 
Art. 18 
Part B – Chapter I-2 

 
necessary to search in very different specialist fields, for example because 
the "person skilled in the art" in the relevant technical field has to be 
regarded as being more than one person (see G-VII, 3). 
This may also happen where subject-matter covering different technical 
fields is found to lack unity. 
When the search division is enlarged this way, all the documents found in 
the various technical fields by its different members are included in the 
same search report. However, only one member draws up the search 
opinion, albeit in consultation with the members with expertise in the other 
technical fields where necessary. 
2.2.1 Where claimed unitary subject-matter covers more than one 
technical field 
Exceptionally, where the subject-matter of an application covers two or 
more technical fields which are so different that a member trained to carry 
out searches in one field cannot reasonably be expected to search all of 
them, two or possibly even more members may share responsibility for 
drawing up the search report. 
The skills needed to carry out a satisfactory search in a particular technical 
field include: 
(a) 
the technical knowledge and training required to properly understand 
the claimed subject-matter 
(b) 
expertise in using the appropriate search tools. 
If the subject-matter of the application extends over different technical 
fields, it may be appropriate to enlarge the search division to include a 
second and possibly even more members who are specialised in those 
fields. 
In all the above cases, the search report and search opinion (if applicable ‒ 
see B-XI, 7) are usually issued by one member only. 
2.2.2 Further searches in a different technical field for a non-unitary 
application  
The search division may also have more than one member where 
subject-matter in different technical fields is found to lack of unity. Such 
cases are handled as follows: 
(a) 
The first member carries out a search on the invention first 
mentioned in the claims (see F-V, 3.4) in one technical field and 
draws up a search opinion (if applicable – see B-XI, 7) on this first 
invention and the reasons for the lack of unity. The applicant is sent a 
partial search report (see B-VII, 1.1), along with an invitation to pay 
further search fees for the inventions that are in another technical 
field. 
 

Part B – Chapter I-3 
(b) 
The applicant pays further search fees for the inventions they want to 
have searched (see B-VII, 1.2.1). 
(c) 
A second member specialised in the relevant technical field searches 
the other inventions for which fees were paid. 
(d) 
The second member adds an opinion on the additionally searched 
inventions to the first member's opinion on unity and the first 
invention. 
In very exceptional cases, more than one other member (i.e. also a third or 
possibly even more members) will be needed to search the other invention 
or inventions for which fees have been paid, but the procedure followed is 
the same. 
 

Part B – Chapter II-1 
Chapter II – General 
1. Search and substantive examination 
The procedure a European patent application goes through from its filing to 
the grant of a patent (or the refusal of the application) has two separate 
main stages, i.e. the search and substantive examination. 
1.1 Contact between the applicant and the search division 
Consultations with the search division can only take place after the 
application has entered the examination stage, except in the cases 
mentioned in B-VIII, 3.2.2 and 4.2.2, and for issues related to the timing of 
the search report. The search division must not consent to earlier 
consultations (see also B-XI, 8) and must instead tell applicants that any 
issues they wish to raise will be dealt with in examination. For the 
procedure at the examination stage, see C-VII, 2.5. 
2. Aim of the search 
The search is aimed at identifying the state of the art relevant for 
determining whether, and if so to what extent, the claimed invention is new 
and involves an inventive step. 
It is not usually aimed at finding disclosures of potential interest to the 
applicant, but documents not directly relevant for assessing the 
patentability of the claimed invention may be cited in the search report in 
certain circumstances (see B-X, 9.2.2 and 9.2.5). 
Both the content of the search opinion and the later substantive 
examination depend on the outcome of the search as it establishes what 
state of the art is to be taken as the basis for assessing the patentability of 
the invention. The search must therefore be as complete and effective as 
possible, within the limitations necessarily imposed by unity of invention 
and other factors (see B-III, 2, B-VII and B-VIII). 
3. Search documentation 
The search is carried out in in-house or external document collections or 
databases. Their contents can be accessed systematically, e.g. using 
keywords, classification symbols or indexing codes. The available 
documentation consists largely of patent documents but also includes 
non-patent literature, such as articles from periodicals (see B-IX). 
4. Search report 
The search report contains the results of the search and, in particular, 
identifies the documents forming the relevant state of the art (see B-X, 9). 
It informs the applicant, the EPO examining divisions and ‒ once published 
‒ the public of the relevant state of the art. 
It is accompanied by a search opinion (see B-XI; except in the cases 
mentioned in B-XI, 7) and, together, they make up the extended European 
search report (EESR). 
Art. 17 
Art. 18 
Rule 61(1) 
Art. 92 
Rule 61(1) 
Art. 92 
Art. 93(1) 
Part B – Chapter II-2 

 
4.1 European searches 
The main task of the EPO's search divisions is to carry out searches and 
draw up search reports for European patent applications. However, they 
may also be called on to perform the various other types of search listed 
below. 
4.2 Additional European searches 
An additional search may be necessary once a European patent application 
reaches the examination stage, for example because: 
(i) 
the claims have been amended and now encompass subject-matter 
not covered by the original search (see, however, C-III, 3.2.1 and 
H-II, 6.1 on claims not searched because of a lack of unity and 
H-IV, 4.1.2 on amendments introducing subject-matter from the 
description and so resulting in claims defining subject-matter which is 
not linked to the originally searched subject-matter by a single 
general inventive concept). 
(ii) 
the deficiencies which resulted in an incomplete search or the issue 
of a declaration replacing a search report under Rule 63 or a 
declaration under Art. 17(2)(a) or (b) PCT (see B-VIII and C-IV, 7.3) 
have been overcome by amendments or been rebutted during 
substantive examination. 
(iii) 
the examining division has reversed the search division's opinion on 
novelty or lack of inventive step (see B-III, 1.1) or on other issues 
(see B-III, 1.2), in particular lack of unity of invention (see B-VII), 
subject-matter to be excluded from the search (see B-III, 3.11 and 
B-VIII) or Rule 62a. 
(iv) 
the original search was limited or suffered from imperfections. 
The examining division will use any new documents found in an additional 
search if it considers them relevant for examining the application. It must 
then make copies available to the applicant (Art. 113(1)). 
Similarly, an additional search may be needed if a granted European patent 
is opposed (see D-VI, 5). 
4.3 Supplementary European searches 
An international (PCT) application for which the EPO acts as designated 
Office or elected Office and which has been accorded an international filing 
date is deemed to be a European patent application. Where an 
international (PCT) search report is already available, it will replace the 
European search report. The search division will then draw up a 
supplementary European search report or issue a declaration replacing it 
under Rule 63 except in cases where the Administrative Council has 
decided that it can be dispensed with (see B-II, 4.3.1). 
The (S)ISA/IPEA (other than the EPO) will have given opinions on the 
novelty, inventive step and industrial applicability of the claimed invention 
under Art. 33(1) PCT and possibly also on unity of invention under 
Art. 17 
Rule 63 
Art. 17(2) PCT 
Rule 64 
Rule 62a 
Art. 153(2), 
(6) and (7) 
 

Part B – Chapter II-3 
Art. 34(3) PCT and any subject-matter to be excluded from the international 
search/preliminary examination under Art. 17(2)/Art. 34(4) PCT. The search 
division will consider these opinions but is free to diverge from them in its 
supplementary European search report and its search opinion (if applicable 
– see B-XI, 7). 
The search division can use the documents cited in the international search 
report to support its findings (e.g. lack of novelty) in the search opinion (if 
applicable – see B-XI, 7). 
4.3.1 Dispensing with the supplementary European search report 
The Administrative Council has decided that no supplementary European 
search report is to be drawn up for an international application if: 
(i) 
the 
EPO 
was 
the 
ISA 
or 
the 
SISA 
(OJ EPO 2009, 594; 
OJ EPO 2010, 316) 
(ii) 
the Swedish Intellectual Property Office, the Austrian Patent Office or 
the Spanish Patent and Trademark Office was the ISA and it was 
filed before 1 July 2005 (OJ EPO 1979, 248; OJ EPO 1995, 511; 
OJ EPO 2012, 212 and 219). 
The search fee may be reduced in these cases (see A-X, 9.3.1). 
4.3.2 A supplementary European search report is required 
If a supplementary European search report is required (see B-II, 4.3.1), the 
supplementary European search will generally be carried out in the same 
way as a European search. Any limitation is left to the search division's 
discretion; a fixed approach to this is not possible since the search 
practices at other ISAs are not fully harmonised with those of the EPO and 
the documentation available to them may differ too. 
The EPO generally aims to avoid any unnecessary duplication of work and 
so relies on the efficiency and quality of the international searches as far as 
possible. If the international search report has not yet been drawn up when 
the application enters the European phase, the EPO will wait until it is 
available before starting to process the application. The EPO as designated 
Office requests the ISA or the SISA to supply, together with the 
international search report, copies of the documents cited in it 
(Art. 20(3) PCT, see also Rule 44.3(a) PCT or Rule 45bis.7(c) PCT). If a 
cited document is not in one of the EPO's official languages and the search 
division needs a translation into one of them, it provides this itself (e.g. a 
patent family member or an abstract of the document in an official 
language, see B-VI, 6.2) unless it can obtain it from another source, 
e.g. the applicant or the ISA. 
4.3.3 Application documents for the supplementary European 
search report 
The European grant procedure, including the supplementary European 
search, is based on the application documents specified by the applicant 
when the application enters the European phase (Rule 159(1)(b)). 
However, if the applicant amends the application within a non-extendable 
Rule 159(1)(b) 
Rule 161 
Part B – Chapter II-4 

 
period of six months from notification of a communication under 
Rule 161(2) (see E-IX, 3), the amended application will be taken as the 
basis for the supplementary European search instead (see also B-XI, 2). 
For procedures relating to Euro-PCT applications where no supplementary 
European search report is drawn up by the EPO, see E-IX, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4. 
4.4 International (PCT) searches 
For the practice as regards international (PCT) searches, see the PCT 
International Search and Preliminary Examination Guidelines and the latest 
version of the EPO's guide for applicants entitled "Euro-PCT Guide: PCT 
procedure at the EPO", which is available at epo.org. 
4.5 International-type searches 
Under the PCT, the EPO, as an ISA, may be entrusted with carrying out 
"international-type 
searches" 
for 
national 
patent 
applications 
(Art. 15(5) PCT). These searches are by definition similar to international 
searches, and the same considerations apply, except where the national 
application searched is found to lack unity of invention, in which case no 
reasoned statement on this finding is included in the search report and no 
invitation to pay further search fees is issued. However, it may be possible 
for applicants to pay these fees directly to the national offices. Where a 
written opinion is issued, it is drafted in accordance with EPO practice 
under PCT Chapter I and does include a reasoned statement on any 
potential lack-of-unity objection. 
4.6 Searches on national applications 
The EPO search divisions also carry out searches on national applications 
for some of the EPC contracting states. These Guidelines are not 
necessarily fully applicable to these national searches and do not always 
give details of how they differ from European searches. However, national 
and European searches are largely identical and at any rate compatible. 
Prot. Centr. I(1)(b) 
 

Part B – Chapter III-1 
Chapter III – Characteristics of the search 
1. Opinions of the search division 
1.1 Opinions in relation to the search report 
The aim of the search is to identify the state of the art relevant for 
assessing novelty and inventive step (see B-II, 2). Decisions on novelty and 
inventive step are the responsibility of the examining divisions, but the 
search division already gives the applicant a reasoned assessment of 
whether the application and the claimed invention meet the EPC 
requirements in the search opinion (if applicable ‒ see B-XI, 7). The 
applicant can then reply to this in the examination proceedings (Art. 113(1) 
and B-XI, 8). The categories the search division assigns to the documents 
cited in the search report (see B-X, 9.2) similarly amount to implicit opinions 
on patentability and are subject to review by the examining division at the 
examination stage (see B-II, 4.2(iii) and B-XI, 1.2), in particular in the light 
of the applicant's reply (see B-XI, 8). 
The assessment of patentability at the search stage can have a direct 
bearing on how the search itself is carried out: see B-III, 3.8 (on searching 
the subject-matter of dependent claims), B-III, 2.3 (on searching in 
neighbouring technical fields) and B-IV, 2.6 (on stopping the search when 
only trivial subject-matter remains). 
1.2 Opinions on matters relating to limitation of the search 
Occasionally, matters of substantive examination other than novelty or 
inventive step have a direct bearing on how the search is carried out and 
may result in its limitation. The search division's opinions on theses matters 
are likewise subject to review by the examining division (see T 178/84 and 
T 631/97, and B-II, 4.2(iii) and B-XI, 1.2), in particular in the light of the 
applicant's reply to the search opinion (see B-XI, 8). 
See B-VII (Unity of invention) and B-VIII (Subject-matter to be excluded 
from the search) for examples. 
2. Scope of the search 
2.1 Completeness of the search 
A European search is essentially a thorough, all-encompassing search 
carried out to a high quality standard. Nevertheless, a search of this kind 
cannot always be 100% complete, in particular because all information 
retrieval systems, however they are operated, are inevitably imperfect. The 
search is carried out in a way that minimises the risk of overlooking 
complete anticipations of any claims, or other highly relevant prior art. 
Given the sheer amount of material on less relevant prior art that is 
available in the document collection, it is acceptable if not all of it is found 
(however, see also B-III, 2.3). For limitations of the subject-matter 
searched, see B-VIII. 
The scope of the international search is defined in Art. 15(4) PCT, which 
states that the ISA must endeavour to discover as much of the relevant 
prior art as its facilities permit and must, in any case, consult the minimum 
Rule 61(1) 
Part B – Chapter III-2 

 
documentation specified in Rule 34 PCT. It follows from this definition ("as 
much … as its facilities permit") that international searches must be 
equivalent in scope to a European search and must be carried out to the 
same high quality standard. This means that, if the EPO carried out the 
international search or the supplementary international search, it does not 
need to draw up a supplementary European search report and its 
international search report can replace the European search report 
(Art. 153(6) EPC, see OJ EPO 2010, 316, and OJ EPO 2011, 616; see also 
B-II, 4.3). 
2.2 Effectiveness and efficiency of the search 
The effectiveness and efficiency of any search for relevant documents 
(Rule 61(1)) depend on the degree of order which is inherent in, or which 
can be applied to, the searched document collection as it is this order that 
enables the search division to determine which parts of the documentation 
to consult. The basic means of creating order in a document collection are 
words, classification units, indexing codes or bibliographical links. The 
order can be permanent, as with indexing words or codes and classification 
symbols, or it can be created on demand by a search strategy judiciously 
using the basic means mentioned above to identify the parts of the 
documentation that are likely to contain material relevant to the invention. 
To ensure its resources are deployed as efficiently as possible, the search 
division, drawing on its knowledge of the technology in question and the 
available search tools, uses its judgement to omit parts of the 
documentation in which it is unlikely that any relevant documents will be 
found, for example parts containing documents from before the area of 
technology in question began to develop. Similarly, it only needs to consult 
one member of a patent family unless it has good reason to suppose that, 
in a particular case, there are relevant substantial differences in the content 
of different members of the same family (see B-IX, 2.4). 
2.3 Search in neighbouring fields 
The search division carries out the search in document collections and 
databases in which it can expect to find material covering all the technical 
fields directly relevant to the invention. The search strategy determines 
which parts of this documentation should be consulted. The scope of the 
search may then have to be extended to parts covering neighbouring fields, 
but it is for the search division to decide in each individual case whether 
this is necessary in view of what it has already found in the initially 
consulted parts (see B-III, 3.2). 
When deciding which technical fields are to be regarded as neighbouring in 
a particular case, the search division has to consider what appears to be 
the invention's essential technical contribution and not only the specific 
functions expressly mentioned in the application. 
It is left to the search division's discretion whether to widen its search to 
include fields not mentioned in the application. In deciding on this, it does 
not put itself in the inventor's shoes and does not try to imagine every 
single possible application of the invention. The most important question 
guiding its decision is whether searching in neighbouring fields is likely to 
 

Part B – Chapter III-3 
uncover material on which a reasonable inventive-step objection could be 
based (see T 176/84, T 195/84 and G-VII, 3). 
2.4 Internet searches 
The search can also cover internet sources, including online technical 
journals, online databases or other websites (see OJ EPO 2009, 456). The 
scope of any search on the internet will depend on the specific case, but 
there are some technical fields, especially in the area of information or 
software technology, where the most relevant prior art is unlikely to be 
found without systematically searching there. The search division may use 
the internet even when searching unpublished applications but must bear 
its duty to keep them confidential in mind and take great care to ensure that 
its search terms do not inadvertently disclose any confidential information 
about the invention. It is up to the search division to select suitable 
keywords that will enable it to search the invention effectively without 
disclosing it. This means, for example, not entering long portions of a 
claim's wording as a search term. 
On the dating of internet citations, see G-IV, 7.5. 
3. The subject-matter of the search 
3.1 Basis for the search 
The search is carried out on the basis of the claims, with due regard to the 
description and any drawings (Art. 92). The claims determine the extent of 
the protection the European patent will confer if granted (Art. 69(1)). 
3.2 Interpretation of claims 
The search is not restricted by the literal wording of the claims but also not 
broadened to include everything that a person skilled in the art might 
envisage from considering the description and drawings. The search 
division may need to consider the contents of the description and/or 
drawings when performing the search in order to: 
(i) 
identify the technical problem and its solution 
(ii) 
define unclear terms not defined in the claims 
(iii) 
define clear terms given a definition different from their usual 
meaning 
(iv) 
ascertain whether there is a fallback position. 
The aim of the search is to identify prior art which is relevant to novelty 
and/or inventive step (see B-II, 2). The search covers what appear to be the 
invention's essential features and is adapted to take account of any 
changes in the (objective) technical problem solved by the invention that 
may later arise in view of the prior art found so far (see B-IV, 2.3 and 2.4 
and G-VII, 5.2). 
When interpreting claims for the purpose of the search, the search division 
will also consider any prior art comprising technical features which are 
Art. 92 
Art. 69(1) 
Rule 43(6) 
Art. 92 
Part B – Chapter III-4 

 
well-known equivalents of the technical features of the claimed invention 
and which may mean it lacks inventive step (see G-VII, Annex, 1.1(ii)). 
3.2.1 Claims with explicit references to the description or drawings 
Although explicit references in the claims to features elucidated in the 
description or in the drawings are only permissible where "absolutely 
necessary" (Rule 43(6) – see also B-III, 3.5 and F-IV, 4.17), claims 
containing such references are still searched if these features are 
unambiguously defined by specific parts of the description. 
However, where the reference does not clearly identify which subject-
matter of the description and/or drawings is to be regarded as included in 
the claim, an invitation under Rule 63(1) is issued. In the special case of an 
"omnibus claim" (e.g. one reading: "The invention substantially as herein 
described"), no invitation under Rule 63(1) is issued, and the search report 
will subsequently be treated as complete. This means that this kind of 
subject-matter will be dealt with only during examination. 
The same procedure is followed regardless of whether or not the reference 
to the drawings and/or the description is allowable under Rule 43(6). In 
either case, the claim will have the same scope: if the reference is not 
allowable, the applicant will be asked to copy the definition of the technical 
feature from the description and/or drawings into the claim; if it is allowable, 
the claim will stay as it is. 
However, where the reference does not appear to be allowable under 
Rule 43(6), the search division will object to it in the search opinion (if 
applicable – see B-XI, 7). 
3.2.2 Using the description and/or drawings to identify the technical 
problem 
Rule 42(1)(c) states that the description must (at least implicitly) mention 
the technical problem the invention is intended to solve (see also F-II, 4.5). 
This means the technical problem can be identified even if it is not 
immediately apparent from the claims. 
However, the technical problem may change in view of the prior art found 
(see G-VII, 5.3, 
H-V, 2.4 
and 
T 39/93, 
OJ EPO 1997, 134; 
see 
also G-VII, 5.2, T 184/82, OJ EPO 1984, 261, and T 732/89). 
3.2.3 Using the description and/or drawings to define unclear terms 
not defined in the claims 
Sometimes, the terms used to define claimed technical features are unclear 
and so the scope of the claims cannot be determined unambiguously. The 
search division then uses the description and/or drawings to interpret what 
these terms mean (see F-IV, 4.2). 
For example: 
Claim 1: Pneumatic tyre comprising a wide groove disposed in a tread 
portion, characterised in that the wide groove is provided on the groove 
 

Part B – Chapter III-5 
bottom with at least one longitudinal rib extending in the longitudinal 
direction of the wide groove. 
Description: The term "wide", as used in the context of the present 
invention, means not less than 20mm wide. 
The term "wide" in claim 1 is unclear because it is a relative term with no 
well-defined meaning in the technical field, and so the scope of the claim is 
also unclear (F-IV, 4.6, Art. 84). However, the description unambiguously 
defines "wide" as meaning "not less than 20mm wide". The search division 
takes this definition into account during the search (and subsequently 
objects to the clarity of the term "wide" under Art. 84, second sentence, in 
the search opinion). The definition of "wide" in the description is also a 
fallback position (see B-III, 3.2.5). 
3.2.4 Using the description and/or drawings to define clear terms 
given a definition different from their usual meaning 
The meaning given to a technical term in the description and/or the 
drawings sometimes differs from the one commonly accepted in the 
relevant technical field. The meaning given can make the term (and so the 
scope of the claim) broader (see Example 1) or narrower (see Example 2). 
Example 1 
Claim 1: Halide salt of compound A 
"Halide salt" normally means fluoride, chloride, bromide or iodide salt. 
Description: In the context of the present invention the term halide salt 
means fluoride, chloride, bromide, iodide or tosylate salt. 
Here, the claim at first appears to be clear because it uses a technical term 
("halide salt") that has a clear and well-established meaning in the relevant 
technical field. However, the description gives this term a broader meaning 
than its well-established definition (i.e. it also includes tosylate salt). 
Example 2 
As in Example 1, except that the description defines "halide salt" as 
meaning fluoride, chloride or bromide salt. 
Here, the meaning of "halide salt" is narrower than its well-established 
definition (i.e. it does not cover iodide salt). 
In both cases, the search will take into account both the term's generally 
accepted definition in the relevant technical field and its definition in the 
application itself. 
3.2.5 Ascertaining whether there is a fallback position 
Claims sometimes contain an unclear and undefined term for which a clear 
preferred embodiment (i.e. a "fallback position"; see B-III, 3.2(iv)) is given 
only in the description and/or drawings (see B-III, 3.2.3). The search will 
then be based on the broadest technically sensible interpretation of the 
Part B – Chapter III-6 

 
term. However, if the term's meaning is so unclear that a meaningful search 
cannot be carried out, it is justified to limit the scope of the search under 
Rule 63. 
3.3 Amended claims, missing parts (Rule 56) or erroneously filed 
application documents or parts (Rule 56a) 
3.3.1 General considerations 
Where a European application does not derive from an earlier international 
application, the applicant is not allowed to amend the claims before 
receiving the European search report (Rule 137(1)). This means that the 
search is carried out on the basis of the claims in the European application 
as originally filed or of any set of claims filed under Rule 57(c) or 58. 
Search and examination will be based on the filing date and the application 
documents established during the procedure under Rule 56 or 56a. These 
documents are considered the documents as originally filed within the 
meaning of Art. 123(2). If they contain missing parts of the description 
and/or missing drawings filed under Rule 56(3), the application including 
the missing parts will form the basis for the search. In cases where 
erroneously filed documents and correct documents are both part of the 
application as filed (i.e. in cases under Rule 56a(4) of corrections without a 
change in the filing date), the search will be performed as usual, and the 
procedures under Rule 63 or 64 applied where appropriate. If the EPO has 
already begun to draw up the search report when correct documents are 
filed, the applicant will be invited to pay a further search fee (Rule 56a(8)) 
(see A-II, 6.7). 
In addition, when the search division expects the application to be redated 
by the examining division later on in the proceedings (see C-III, 1), it 
checks whether the Receiving Section's assessment of the "completely 
contained" criterion was correct (see H-IV, 2.2.2). If the Receiving Section 
wrongly considered that the missing parts and/or elements or the correct 
parts and/or elements were completely contained in the priority document, 
the search will be widened to include documents which would be relevant if 
the application were to be redated (such documents can be cited as "L" 
documents in the European search report (see also B-XI, 2.1)). The same 
applies to Euro-PCT applications which contain missing parts of the 
description, drawings or claims and/or missing elements filed under 
Rule 20.6 PCT. 
3.3.2 Specific rules applicable to Euro-PCT applications 
Where a European application derives from an earlier international 
application, the applicant may have amended the international application 
in the international phase, either after receiving the international search 
report (Art. 19(1) PCT) or during international preliminary examination 
(Art. 34(2)(b) PCT). Under Rule 159(1)(b), the applicant can then choose 
whether to enter the European phase with these amended application 
documents (including claims) or with the ones originally filed. The EPO also 
gives them an opportunity to amend the application documents (including 
the claims) within a set time limit (Rule 161(2), see E-IX, 3). The application 
Rule 56 
Rule 56a 
Rule 137(1) 
Rule 159(1)(b) 
Rule 161 
 

Part B – Chapter III-7 
as amended is then taken as the basis for any supplementary European 
search to be carried out under Art. 153(7) (see B-II, 4.3 and B-XI, 2). 
See B-VIII, 6 for the procedure followed where the claims of an 
international application entering the European (regional) phase are 
amended in such a way that they contravene Art. 123(2). 
3.4 Abandoned claims 
Claims in a European patent application that are deemed to have been 
abandoned because the fees for them were not paid must be excluded 
from the search. The claims which have actually been searched are 
specified in the search report. This applies both to searches on directly filed 
European patent applications and to supplementary European searches on 
Euro-PCT applications entering the European phase (see B-II, 4.3). 
3.5 Anticipation of amendments to claims 
In principle, and in so far as possible and reasonable, the search covers all 
the subject-matter to which the claims are directed or to which they might 
reasonably be expected to be directed if they are amended (see, however, 
B-VII, 1.3 on cases of lack of unity and H-IV, 4 on the ambit of Rule 137(5)). 
Example 
Where an application relating to an electric circuit contains one or more 
claims directed only to the function and manner of operation, and the 
description and drawings include an example detailing a non-trivial 
transistor circuit, the search includes this circuit. 
However, it is not sufficient for the application as filed to contain one 
broadly worded independent claim covering several embodiments, and no 
dependent claims, for the applicant to be entitled to a search of all the 
features of those embodiments (see T 1679/10). 
3.6 Broad claims 
The search division does not have to make any special effort to search 
unduly wide or speculative claims beyond the subject-matter that is 
sufficiently disclosed in the application (Art. 83) and supported by the 
description (Art. 84). 
Example 1 
If the claims in an application that relates to an automatic telephone 
exchange and describes it in detail are directed to an automatic 
communication switching centre, the search is not widened to include 
automatic telegraph exchanges, data switching centres, etc. merely 
because the claims are broadly worded but only if it is probable that it will 
then produce a document on which a reasonable novelty or inventive-step 
objection could be based. 
Example 2 
If a claim is directed to a process for manufacturing an "impedance 
element" but the description and drawings relate only to the manufacture of 
Rule 45(3) 
Rule 162(4) 
Art. 83 
Art. 84 
Part B – Chapter III-8 

 
a resistor element, and do not indicate how other types of impedance 
element could be manufactured by the claimed process, widening the 
search to include, say, the manufacture of capacitors is normally not 
justified. 
Example 3 
If the main claim relates to the chemical treatment of a substrate, but it 
appears from the description or all the examples that the problem to be 
solved depends solely on the nature of natural leather, the search is 
normally not widened to cover the fields of plastics, fabrics or glass. 
Example 4 
If the description and drawings are directed to a lock with a safety cylinder 
but the claims refer to a device allowing the indexation of the angular 
position of a first element with respect to two other rotating elements, then 
the search is limited to locks. 
In exceptional cases where there is such a lack of disclosure or support 
that a meaningful search over the whole scope of the claims is impossible, 
it may make sense to follow the procedure under Rule 63 and issue either a 
partial search report or a declaration replacing the search report 
(see B-VIII, 3). 
3.7 Independent and dependent claims 
The search carried out in the documentation to be consulted for the 
independent claim or claims must also cover all dependent claims (for 
cases not complying with Rule 43(2), see B-VIII, 4). Dependent claims are 
ones which are restricted by all the features of the claim or claims on which 
they depend. So, where the subject-matter of an independent claim is 
novel, that of its dependent claims will also be novel (see, however, 
F-VI, 2.4.3). When the patentability of the subject-matter of the independent 
claim is not in doubt after the search, there is no need to carry out a further 
search or cite documents for the subject-matter of the dependent claims as 
such (see, however, B-II, 4.2(iii) and B-XI, 1.2). 
Example 1 
An application relating to cathode ray oscilloscope tubes has an 
independent claim directed to specific means along the edge of the front of 
the tube for illuminating the screen and a dependent claim directed to a 
specific connection between the front and the main part of the tube. When 
searching in the parts of the documentation consulted for the illumination 
means, the search division will also look for material relating to the 
connecting means, whether in combination with the illumination means or 
not. But, if its search in these parts of the documentation does not cast any 
doubt on the patentability of the illuminating means, it will not continue the 
search on the connecting means in other parts of the documentation which 
are likely to contain material relevant to or dealing specifically with these 
connections. 
Rule 43(4) 
 

Part B – Chapter III-9 
Example 2 
An application dealing with a pharmaceutical composition for treating nail 
infections has an independent claim relating to specific combinations of the 
active ingredients The patentability of this claim's subject-matter is not in 
doubt after the search, so there is no need to continue the search in 
relation to dependent claims dealing with the use of a specific volatile 
organic solvent as a carrier in the composition. 
3.8 Search on dependent claims 
However, where there is doubt about whether the independent claim's 
subject-matter is patentable, the search may have to be continued in other 
parts of the documentation, e.g. in one or more additional classification 
units, in order to assess whether the subject-matter of the dependent claim 
as such is novel and involves an inventive step. No special search is 
carried out for features that seem prima facie trivial or are generally known 
in the art. However, a handbook or other document showing that a feature 
is generally known can be cited if it can be found quickly (see G-VII, 6(iii)). 
A dependent claim that adds another feature (instead of providing more 
detail on something already in the independent claim) has to be considered 
in combination with the features in the independent claim and is dealt with 
accordingly (see F-IV, 3.4). 
3.9 Combination of elements in a claim 
For claims characterised by a combination of elements (e.g. A, B and C), 
the search is aimed at finding prior art relating to the combination. 
However, when searching the parts of the documentation selected for this, 
the search division should also search them for sub-combinations, including 
the elements individually (e.g. A and B, A and C, B and C, and also A, B 
and C separately). Other parts of the documentation are searched either for 
sub-combinations or for individual elements of the combination only if this is 
still necessary for establishing the novelty of the element in order to assess 
whether the combination involves an inventive step. 
3.10 Different categories 
If the application contains different categories of claims, the search must 
cover all of them (for cases not complying with Rule 43(2), see B-VIII, 4). 
However, if a product claim clearly seems to be both new and non-obvious, 
the search division will not carry out any special search on claims for a 
process which inevitably results in the manufacture of that product or for 
use of the product (see F-IV, 3.8 and G-VII, 13). When the application 
contains only claims of one category, it may make sense to include other 
categories in the search. For example, it can generally be assumed, 
i.e. unless the application contains contrary information, that, in a claim 
directed to a chemical process, the starting products form part of the state 
of the art and need not be searched. The intermediate products will only be 
searched if they are the subject-matter of one or more claims. The final 
products on the other hand will always have to be searched unless they are 
clearly known. 
Part B – Chapter III-10 

 
3.11 Subject-matter excluded from search 
The search division can decide to exclude certain subject-matter from its 
search. It may do this where the subject-matter falls under one of the 
exceptions to patentability laid down in the EPC or cannot be considered 
susceptible to industrial application (see B-VIII, 1 and 2). It may also do this 
where the application falls so short of other EPC requirements that it is 
impossible to carry out a meaningful search on some or all of the claims or 
part of a claim (see B-VIII, 3) or where the application does not comply with 
Rule 43(2) (see B-VIII, 4). 
3.12 Lack of unity 
Where the claims do not relate to a single invention only ‒ or to a group of 
inventions that are so closely linked that they form a single general 
inventive concept ‒ the search will normally be restricted to the invention or 
linked group of inventions first mentioned in the claims (see B-VII and 
F-V, 3.4). If the search is restricted this way, the applicant will be informed 
in a communication accompanying the partial search report (see B-VII, 1.2). 
3.13 Technological background 
It makes sense to widen the scope of the search to include the following 
"technological background" to the invention: 
– 
the preamble to the first claim, i.e. the part coming before the 
expression "characterised by" or "characterised in that" 
– 
any state of the art which the introductory part of the description says 
is known but which is not identified by specific citations 
– 
the general technological background to the invention (often called 
"general state of the art"). 
Rule 63 
Rule 62a 
Rule 64 
 

Part B – Chapter IV-1 
Chapter IV – Search procedure and strategy 
1. Procedure before searching 
Starting the workflow for a European search report, a European search 
opinion or a clarification request under Rule 62a and/or 63(1) triggers a 
pre-search algorithm that generates a list of documents to be inspected by 
the search division. This creates a marker in the file showing that the 
search division has started the search. The date when the search started 
will be relevant if the search fee has to be refunded because the application 
is withdrawn, refused or deemed to be withdrawn (see A-X, 10.2.1). 
1.1 Analysis of the application 
The search division first of all studies the application to determine the 
subject-matter of the claimed invention (see B-III, 3) and critically analyses 
the claims in the light of the description and drawings to establish whether 
they are potentially open to any objection. In particular, it studies the 
content of the claims, description and drawings in enough detail to identify 
the problem the invention is intended to solve, the inventive concept 
leading to its solution, the features essential to the solution, as found in the 
claims, and the results and effects obtained (see, however, B-III, 3.5). If, 
according to the description, technical features not included in the claims 
are essential to solving the stated problem, these features are included in 
the search (see F-IV, 4.3(ii) and T 32/82). 
1.2 Formal deficiencies 
If the search division notices any formal shortcomings which have been 
overlooked by the Receiving Section, it issues an internal communication 
bringing them to the attention of the Receiving Section (or of the examining 
division, where it has requested an additional search), which then takes 
appropriate action. However, the search division does not redo the 
Receiving Section's work and does not make any time-consuming enquiries 
into the formalities. Deficiencies it might notice in an application include: 
(i) 
physical deficiencies (see A-III, 3.2), including: 
(a) 
no electronic sequence listing (Rule 30(1), OJ EPO 2011, 372, 
OJ EPO 2013, 542) 
(b) 
incorrect sequence and/or positioning of page numbering 
and/or failure to use Arabic numerals to number pages 
(Art. 2(5) of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113) 
(c) 
drawings in the description and/or claims (Art. 2(8) of the 
decision 
of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113) 
(d) 
erasures and/or alterations in the application documents that 
cast doubt on the authenticity of their content and/or are not 
conducive to good reproduction (Art. 2(11) of the decision of 
the 
President 
of 
the 
EPO 
dated 
25 November 2022, 
OJ EPO 2022, A113). 
Art. 90 
Art. 92 
Art. 78 
Art. 53(a) 
Rules 30 to 34, 40 to 
45, 47 to 50 and 55 to 
58 
OJ EPO 2022, A113 
Part B – Chapter IV-2 

 
(ii) 
prohibited matter, i.e. content which: 
(a) 
is contrary to "ordre public" (see A-III, 8.1, F-II, 7.2 and 
G-II, 4.1, 4.1.1 and 4.1.2) or 
(b) 
amounts to a disparaging statement (see A-III, 8.2) (as 
opposed to permissible "fair comment" – see F-II, 7.3). 
(iii) 
non-compliance with the provisions on depositing biological material 
(see A-IV, 4), in particular any failure to properly identify the 
depositary institution and the accession number it assigned to the 
biological material (Rule 31(1)(c); see G 2/93 and A-IV, 4.2). 
(iv) 
a failure to correctly identify the application as a divisional application 
within the meaning of Art. 76(1) (Rule 41(2)(e); see A-IV, 1.3.2). 
(v) 
text in two different EPO official languages (Art. 14). 
1.3 Documents cited or supplied by the applicant 
Under the utilisation scheme (see Rule 141(1) and B-XI, 9, as well as 
OJ EPO 2010, 410), applicants whose application claims a priority are 
expected to file a copy of the results of any search carried out by the office 
of first filing (for more details, see A-III, 6.12). 
If the prior-art information found by the office of first filing is made available 
before the search has been completed, the search division will check the 
citations and assess whether they are relevant for examination and for 
defining the search strategy. 
The search division will also look at documents cited in the application if 
they are referred to as the starting point of the invention, as showing the 
state of the art or as providing alternative solutions to the problem 
concerned or if the application's content cannot be properly understood 
without them. But it can disregard them if they clearly relate only to details 
not directly relevant to the claimed invention. 
In the exceptional case that the application cites a document that has not 
been published or is otherwise unavailable to the search division, and it 
appears to be so essential to properly understanding the claimed invention 
that a meaningful search on at least part of it would not be possible without 
knowing what is in it, the search division will send an invitation under 
Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3) that specifies: 
(i) 
which document is needed 
(ii) 
why it is needed 
(iii) 
what will happen if it is not submitted in time (see below). 
The applicant can respond by: 
(a) 
either submitting a copy of the document 
Art. 53(a) 
Rule 48(1)(a) and 
(b) 
Rules 31 to 33 
Rule 66 
Rule 141 
 

Part B – Chapter IV-3 
(b) 
or arguing why the document is not needed for a meaningful search 
and/or indicating a part of the application whose subject-matter can 
be searched without knowing what is in the document. 
If the applicant does not submit a copy of the document ‒ or convince the 
search division that it is not needed for a meaningful search ‒ within the 
time limit under Rule 63(1), the search division will issue a partial search 
report or, where applicable, a declaration replacing the search report under 
Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.2.1) on the following grounds: 
(1) 
because the document was not available, the claimed invention had 
to be regarded as insufficiently disclosed within the meaning of 
Art. 83 and 
(2) 
the invention was so insufficiently disclosed that it was impossible to 
carry out a meaningful search on at least part of it (see B-VIII, 3). 
If the applicant submits the document after the search report and the 
search opinion (if applicable ‒ see B-XI, 7) have been drawn up, the 
examining division may later carry out an additional search on the originally 
excluded subject-matter in view of the correction of the deficiency which led 
to the incomplete search (see C-IV, 7.3). 
However, applicants should bear in mind that information in documents 
referred to in their application can only be taken into account for sufficiency 
of disclosure under Art. 83 in the circumstances described in F-III, 8. 
2. Search strategy 
2.1 Subject-matter of the search; restrictions 
Once the search division has determined the subject-matter of the invention 
as outlined in B-IV, 1.1, its first step is to define its approach to the search ‒ 
in terms of what concepts, classes, keywords, etc. it plans to use ‒ as 
precisely as possible. Often, one or more of the claims themselves can be 
used for this, but they may have to be generalised in order to cover all 
aspects and embodiments of the invention. At this point, the search division 
should also think about whether there is any non-patentable subject-matter 
(see B-VIII, 1 and 2) or any lack of unity of invention (see B-VII, 1.1). It may 
also have to restrict the search because claims have to be regarded as 
abandoned (see B-III, 3.4), because the application falls so short of the 
EPC requirements that a meaningful search is impossible (see B-VIII, 3) or 
because the application does not comply with Rule 43(2) (see the 
procedure described in B-VIII, 4). If the search is restricted, this must be 
mentioned in the search report or the declaration replacing it under 
Rule 63. The declaration must indicate the reasons for any restrictions 
under Rule 63 (see B-X, 8(iii)). The declaration or the partial search report 
is then treated as the search report for the purposes of the subsequent 
proceedings. 
2.2 Devising a search strategy 
The search division next starts the search process by devising a search 
strategy, i.e. a plan consisting of a series of search statements reflecting 
Rule 63 
Rule 62a 
Part B – Chapter IV-4 

 
the subject-matter to be searched and determining the parts of the 
documentation to be consulted. A search strategy will initially be made up 
of one or more combinations of the basic search means mentioned in 
B-III, 2.2. But the search process is interactive and iterative in the sense 
that the search division will revise its initial search statements depending on 
how useful it considers the information it has found so far (see B-III, 1.1 and 
B-IV, 2.4 and 2.6). When using classification groups, the search division 
selects not only ones in all directly relevant fields but also ones in 
neighbouring fields. 
If appropriate, the search division will also consult other classification 
(e.g. FI) or indexing (e.g. F-terms) schemes. It can also consult colleagues 
working in a similar technical field or in fields possibly related to the content 
of the application (see B-I, 2.1). 
If in doubt about the right fields to search, the search division can ask a 
classification expert. 
There are usually various possible search strategies, and the search 
division, drawing on its experience and knowledge of the available search 
tools, will use its judgement to select the one most appropriate in the case 
in hand. The search division prioritises search strategies leading to those 
parts of the documentation where relevant documents are most likely to be 
found. It will usually give the main technical field of the application priority, 
first of all using the basic search means (see B-III, 2.2) most relevant to the 
specific examples and preferred embodiments of the claimed invention. It 
will always consider the results already obtained in deciding whether it 
needs to widen the search to include other, less relevant parts of the 
documentation. 
2.3 Carrying out the search; types of documents 
The search division then carries out the search, focusing on documents 
relevant for novelty and inventive step. 
It also notes any documents that may be important for other reasons, such 
as: 
(i) 
conflicting documents (see B-VI, 4), i.e.: 
(a) 
published European patent applications under Art. 54(3) 
(see G-IV, 5.1 and 5.1.1) 
(b) 
published international applications under Art. 54(3) and 
Art. 153(3) and (5) (see G-IV, 5.2) 
(c) 
published national applications of EPC contracting states 
under Art. 139(2) (see G-IV, 6 and H-III, 4.4) 
(d) 
any document published during the priority interval of the 
application which may become relevant under Art. 54(2) if the 
priority date turns out to be invalid. 
 

Part B – Chapter IV-5 
If the applications listed above were published within the searched 
application's priority interval, they will be cited in the search report as 
"P" documents (see B-X, 9.2.4); if they were published on or after the 
European or international filing date, they will be cited as 
"E" documents (see B-X, 9.2.6). 
(ii) 
documents that cast doubt on the validity of any priority claimed 
(see B-VI, 3 and F-VI, 1.4.1), which are cited in the search report as 
"L" documents (see B-X, 9.2.8(a)). 
(iii) 
documents that help to understand the claimed invention better or to 
understand it correctly, which are cited in the search report as 
"T" documents (see B-X, 9.2.5). 
(iv) 
documents illustrating the technological background, which are cited 
in the search report as "A" documents (see B-X, 9.2.2). 
(v) 
European patent applications that have the same filing or priority 
date as the searched application, were filed by the same applicant 
and relate to the same invention and that are therefore relevant to 
the issue of double patenting (see G-IV, 5.4), which are cited in the 
search report as "L" documents (see B-X, 9.2.8 (c)). 
(vi) 
documents indicating or establishing the publication date of a 
document found on the internet (see G-IV, 7.5), which are cited in the 
search report as "L" documents (see B-X, 9.2.8 (b)). 
(vii) 
documents found on the internet which do not have any publication 
date but which the search division nonetheless wants to cite to inform 
the applicant or third parties (see G-IV, 7.5.4), which are also cited in 
the search report as "L" documents (see B-X, 9.2.8). 
However, the search division does not spend a lot of time searching for 
these documents or considering any related matters unless it has a special 
reason for doing so in a particular case (see B-VI, 5.3 and B-XI, 4). 
2.4 Redefining the searched subject-matter 
Throughout its search, the search division continuously evaluates the 
results obtained so far and, based on the outcome, uses its judgement to 
decide whether to redefine the searched subject-matter. For example, the 
results may show that it needs to change the classification units selected 
for search or the order of searching them. They may also show that it 
needs to approach the search documentation in a different way, e.g. by 
consulting: 
(i) 
documents cited in relevant documents found during the search, for 
example cited in the description or search report of a patent 
document, or 
(ii) 
documents citing a relevant document found during the search 
Part B – Chapter IV-6 

 
or that it needs to turn to documentation not available to it in-house 
(see B-IX). When searching external document collections for material 
relating to unpublished subject-matter using non-secure connections, e.g. 
on the internet, the search division must choose its search strategies 
extremely carefully to ensure it does not unwittingly reveal confidential 
material – i.e. any part of the unpublished patent application (see B-III, 2.4). 
2.5 Closest prior art and its effects on the search 
Sometimes the search division does not find any documents published 
before the earliest priority date which prejudice the novelty or the inventive 
step of the claimed invention. Wherever possible, it will then cite in the 
search report at least that prior art found which discloses a solution to the 
same subjective problem as the one dealt with by the claimed invention and 
whose known solution comes technically closest to the claimed solution. 
This prior art is cited as an "A" document in the search report 
(see B-X, 9.2.2). 
If it cannot find such a document, the search division will instead cite as the 
closest prior art a document which discloses a solution to a problem closely 
related to the one dealt with by the claimed invention and whose solution is 
technically the most similar to the one in the searched application. 
The search division proceeds in the same way where it finds documents 
which are accidentally prejudicial to the novelty of the claimed invention 
(cited as "X" documents) but which do not affect inventive step once the 
application has been amended appropriately, and does not retrieve any 
other documents prejudicing inventive step. 
Where a European application is derived from an international application 
and undergoes a supplementary European search after entering the 
European phase (Art. 153(7) – see B-II, 4.3), the search division sometimes 
does not uncover any relevant prior-art documents other than the ones 
already cited by the ISA in its international search report. When this 
happens, it is permissible for its supplementary European search report not 
to cite any additional relevant documents (see B-X, 9.1.4). 
2.6 End of search 
Efficiency dictates that the search division use its judgement to end its 
search once the probability of discovering any more relevant prior art 
becomes very low in comparison to the work involved. It can also stop its 
search once it has found documents which clearly demonstrate that the 
entire subject-matter of the claimed invention and its embodiments in the 
description lack novelty, except for features which are trivial or common 
general knowledge in the relevant field and whose application would not 
involve any inventive step. As to the search for conflicting applications, 
see B-VI, 4. 
3. Procedure after searching 
3.1 Drawing up the search report 
Once it has ended its search, the search division selects the documents to 
be cited in the search report from among those it has found. These always 
 

Part B – Chapter IV-7 
include the most relevant ones (which will be specially labelled in the 
report, see B-X, 9.2.1). Less relevant documents are only cited when they 
concern aspects or details of the claimed invention not found in the 
documents already selected for citation. If there is some doubt about 
novelty or inventive step, the search division will cite rather more readily to 
enable the examining division to consider the matter more fully 
(see B-III, 1.1). 
The search division does not cite more documents than necessary in the 
search report and so, if there are several equally relevant documents, it 
normally cites only one of them. The search report is anyway accompanied 
by an automatically generated annex listing the available patent documents 
belonging to the same patent family. When selecting which of these 
documents to cite, the search division should think about what language is 
the most convenient, and should preferably cite (or at least note) 
documents in the same language as the application (see B-X, 9.1.2). 
3.2 Documents discovered after completion of the search 
The search division occasionally discovers other relevant documents after 
completing the search report (e.g. in a later search for a related 
application). These documents can be used in examination (see C-IV, 7.5). 
3.3 Errors in the search report 
If an editorial error is found in a search report before it has been published, 
a new search report will be drawn up to replace it. Where the search report 
has already been sent to the applicant in accordance with Rule 65 but has 
not yet been published, the applicant is notified of the error immediately. If 
a serious error is discovered after publication, a corrigendum is published in 
the European Patent Bulletin, and the applicant and the examining division 
are informed accordingly. If a different document from the one cited has 
been made available to the applicant by mistake, the right one is made 
available. 
 

Part B – Chapter V-1 
Chapter V – Preclassification, IPC and CPC 
classification of European patent applications 
1. Definitions 
"Preclassification" is a first stage of classification using appropriate 
classification symbols to broadly identify the subject-matter of the claimed 
invention (or the invention first claimed if there is more than one) for the 
purposes of internal application (file) routing and allocation. 
"IPC classification" involves assigning the appropriate classification 
symbols under the International Patent Classification (IPC) scheme 
published by WIPO. See the WIPO website for the IPC edition currently in 
force, and the "Guide to the IPC", which explains the principles and rules of 
IPC classification. 
"CPC classification" involves assigning the appropriate classification 
symbols under the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) scheme 
published by the EPO and the USPTO. See the CPC website for the CPC 
edition currently in force, and the "Guide to the CPC", which complements 
the "Guide to the IPC" in that it deals with the differences between the CPC 
and the IPC. 
2. Preclassification (for file routing and allocation) 
Applications have to be preclassified to ensure they are allocated to the 
right search division. The preclassification is assigned using IPC and/or 
CPC symbols and entered on the electronic file. Based on a cursory read of 
the application, this initial level of classification is kept as general as 
possible but should still be specific enough to avoid the need for any further 
preclassification of the file before it can be properly allocated. In the rare 
case that this is necessary, arrangements should be made for the file to be 
redistributed as quickly as possible. 
2.1 Incorrect preclassification 
If the search division finds that an application has been incorrectly 
preclassified and so wrongly allocated to it, it will reallocate it to the right 
search division by making the appropriate changes on the electronic file. 
This is normally agreed beforehand with the other search division, but there 
is sometimes disagreement or uncertainty over classification boundaries, or 
the search division to which the application was initially allocated may be 
unsure how to preclassify it correctly. In such cases, it does not spend time 
trying to resolve the matter but instead forwards the file to a classification 
specialist. 
3. IPC classification of the application 
The IPC classification of a patent application is assigned by the search 
division. 
The IPC classification identifies all features relevant to the technical 
subject-matter of the claimed invention (or of each of the claimed inventions 
if there is more than one) as precisely and comprehensively as possible 
under the IPC scheme. 
Part B – Chapter V-2 

 
The IPC classification consists of "invention information" symbols and 
"additional information" symbols (the latter include IPC indexing codes) 
which are assigned according to the IPC rules set out in the "Guide to the 
IPC". If more than one symbol has to be assigned for the invention itself, 
the symbol which, in the search division's opinion, best identifies it ‒ or, if 
that is not straightforward, the one identifying it for which most information 
is given ‒ is indicated first. The IPC classification should preferably be 
assigned after the search division has studied the content of the application 
to decide how to carry out the search. However, if the application is due to 
be published before the search report is drawn up, it will have to study it in 
enough detail to decide on the IPC classification at this earlier stage 
(see B-X, 5). 
The IPC classification relates to what is disclosed in the published 
application, i.e. the application as filed, and so is determined without taking 
into consideration what the application could potentially contain if it is later 
amended. If, however, the search division's understanding of the invention, 
or of the content of the application as filed, changes significantly during the 
search (e.g. as a result of prior art found or because obscure points have 
been clarified) and the preparations for publication have not yet been 
completed, it will amend the classification accordingly. 
3.1 IPC classification of late-published search reports 
Where the search report is published separately from the application 
because it was not available in time and the search division finds it 
necessary to amend the assigned IPC classification for the reasons given 
in B-V, 3, last paragraph, it will specify the new IPC classification on the 
search report and point out that it replaces the one on the published 
application (which then becomes merely the "classification for publication"). 
It will only change the IPC classification if it is quite certain that it is 
necessary. 
Where a European patent application is classified and published without 
the European search report (A2 publication), the European search report is 
drawn up and published separately at a later stage (A3 publication). It can 
happen that a new edition of the IPC is published in the meantime. The 
search division will then use the IPC edition which was in force when the 
application was published for the search report. 
3.2 IPC classification where the scope of the invention is unclear 
(e.g. a partial search) 
Where the scope of the invention is unclear, the IPC classification has to be 
based on what appears to be the invention in so far as this can be 
understood. It will then have to be amended if the search clears up the 
obscure points (see B-V, 3, last paragraph). 
3.3 IPC classification in cases of lack of unity of invention 
If the search division finds that the application lacks unity of invention, each 
of the different inventions claimed must be classified as set out in B-V, 3 to 
3.2 because they will all be disclosed in the published application.  
 

Part B – Chapter V-3 
3.4 Verification of the IPC classification 
As a general rule, applications are not systematically scrutinised after 
leaving the search division to verify whether it assigned the correct IPC 
classification. However, the EPO may carry out any spot-checks it 
considers necessary to ensure that the IPC is applied correctly and 
uniformly. It is for line managers to decide, based on the search division 
members' level of experience, whether such checks are needed and, if so, 
to arrange for them to be carried out before the applications leave their 
units. 
4. CPC classification of the application 
Besides assigning an IPC classification, the search division also classifies a 
patent application under the CPC. In practice, the CPC classification is 
assigned first, and the relevant IPC symbols are then generated from the 
CPC ones by one-to-one concordance (see the CPC to IPC Concordance 
List, published on the CPC website). 
The CPC classification should be as precise and comprehensive as 
possible under this classification scheme. The CPC comprises "invention 
information" symbols and "additional information" symbols. Additional 
information symbols include CPC indexing codes. If more than one CPC 
classification symbol has to be assigned for the invention itself, the symbol 
which, in the search division's opinion, best identifies it ‒ or, if that is not 
straightforward, the one identifying it for which most information is given ‒ 
is indicated first. 
Like the IPC classification, the CPC classification should preferably be 
assigned after the search division has studied the content of the application 
to decide how to carry out the search. 
Again like the IPC classification, the CPC classification relates to what is 
disclosed in the published application, i.e. the application as filed, and so is 
determined without taking into consideration what the application could 
potentially contain if it is later amended. 
However, if the search division's understanding of the invention, or of the 
content of the application as filed, changes significantly during the search, it 
will change the CPC classification accordingly, using the appropriate 
classification tools. Unlike a change to the IPC classification (see B-V, 3 
above), this change can be made even after the preparations for 
publication have been completed. 
If the scope of the invention is unclear (e.g. a partial search is necessary) 
or if there is a lack of unity of invention, the principles described in B-V, 3.2 
and 3.3 for the IPC classification apply equally to the CPC classification. 
 

Part B – Chapter VI-1 
Chapter VI – The state of the art at the search 
stage 
1. General 
General considerations applying to the state of the art and patentability, 
especially in the context of assessing novelty and inventive step, are set 
out in G-IV. 
2. Oral disclosure, use, exhibition, etc. as state of the art 
Under Art. 54 EPC, a public oral description, use, exhibition, etc. is also 
considered to be prior art. The search division cites such an oral disclosure 
as prior art only if it is convinced that the facts can be proved, for example if 
a document confirming the oral disclosure is available. Written confirmation 
can be accepted as proof even if it was published after the filing date of the 
searched application as it is the date of the oral disclosure which is decisive 
under Art. 54(2). The search division then gives the date of the non-written 
disclosure as the relevant date (see G-VI, 3) but must also indicate the date 
of the subsequent written disclosure. 
However, such instances of oral disclosure, prior public use, disclosure by 
sale, etc. are more usually brought up by opponents in opposition 
proceedings (see G-IV, 7.1 to 7.4). 
3. Priority 
If the claimed priority dates cannot be verified at the search stage and it is 
therefore uncertain whether they are valid, the search for conflicting 
applications will be widened to cover all published applications with an 
earliest claimed priority date up to the searched application's filing date (not 
its claimed priority date or dates) (see B-IV, 2.3 and B-XI, 4). 
4. Conflicting applications 
4.1 Potentially conflicting European and international applications 
Where the search is carried out less than 18 months after the application's 
European or international filing date (i.e. its filing date under Art. 80 and not 
its claimed priority date or dates), it will generally not have been possible to 
search for all potentially conflicting European and international applications, 
and so the examining division will have to complete this search at the 
examination stage (see C-IV, 7.1). However, if the search division does find 
any potentially conflicting published documents, it will cite them in the 
search report. 
Patent documents, regardless of their state or region of origin, which have 
a filing date or valid priority date before the filing date of the searched 
application (not its priority date) but were published on or after that filing 
date and which contain novelty-destroying subject-matter for at least one 
independent claim of the application are referred to as "E" documents 
(see B-X, 9.2.6). 
"E" documents cited in a European search report can be other European or 
international (WO) patent applications with an earlier priority date 
Rule 61(4) 
Art. 54(3) 
Part B – Chapter VI-2 

 
(Art. 54(3)) which are relevant because they anticipate the novelty of the 
subject-matter claimed in the searched application. 
An "E" document is novelty-destroying prior art under Art. 54(3) no matter 
where it discloses the subject-matter in question, i.e. whether it is in the 
claims, description or drawings. 
4.1.1 Published European patent applications as "E" documents 
(a) 
European patent applications filed between 1 July 1997 and 
12 December 2007 were published with all EPC contracting states 
automatically 
designated 
(OJ EPO 1997, 160) 
because 
the 
designation 
fees 
were 
not 
payable 
until 
after 
publication 
(Art. 79(2) EPC 1973). However, the automatic designations made 
on 
publication 
were 
retroactively 
invalidated 
under 
Rule 23a EPC 1973 for the purposes of Art. 54(3) and (4) EPC 1973 
if the relevant designation fees were not then paid on time. 
This means that, when a European patent application is found which 
is potentially relevant as an "E" document because it contains 
novelty-destroying subject-matter and claims earlier priority rights, 
and it was filed after the rule on the designation of states changed 
(i.e. as from 1 July 1997) but before the entry into force of EPC 2000, 
it is not immediately apparent from the published document which 
contracting states were validly designated. Nevertheless, such an 
application is always cited as an "E" document on the assumption 
that it has validly designated states in common with the searched 
application. 
(b) 
Any European patent application filed on or after 13 December 2007 
which has an earlier filing date than the searched application and 
was published on or after that application's filing date is potentially 
state of the art for the purposes of Art. 54(3), regardless of whether 
the same states are designated. 
4.1.2 Published international applications (WO) as "E" documents 
(a) 
According to Art. 158(1) EPC 1973, a conflicting PCT application will 
constitute prior art within the meaning of Art. 54(3) and (4) EPC 1973 
only if before 13 December 2007: 
– 
it designates the EPO, 
– 
where necessary, the applicant supplied the EPO with a 
translation into an official EPO language and 
– 
the applicant paid the EPO's national basic fee (the same as 
the filing fee) under Rule 107(1)(c) EPC 1973 and the EPO's 
designation fees under Rule 107(1)(d) EPC 1973. 
 

Part B – Chapter VI-3 
(b) 
According to Rule 165, a conflicting PCT application will constitute 
prior art within the meaning of Art. 54(3) only if on or after 
13 December 2007 (see G-IV, 5.2): 
– 
it designates the EPO, 
– 
where necessary, the applicant has supplied the EPO with a 
translation into an official EPO language required under 
Art. 153(4) and Rule 159(1)(a) and 
– 
the applicant has paid the filing fee under Rule 159(1)(c). 
Even if it is not possible to verify any of the above requirements based on 
the published international (WO) application (in particular because the 
31-month time limit for meeting them under Art. 22 PCT and Art. 39 PCT 
has not yet expired for the international application at the time of the 
search), the application should still be treated as potentially relevant under 
Art. 54(3) and so be cited as an "E" document in the search report (see 
also B-X, 9.2.6). 
4.2 National prior rights 
National applications may have been filed in one or more of the contracting 
states designated in the European patent application before its filing or 
priority date and then published as national applications or patents on or 
after that date. Such applications do not prevent granting a European 
patent, but are a potential ground for revocation in the state or states 
concerned, and so they are important for the applicant (see H-III, 4.4). If 
any are found during the search, they will be mentioned in the search report 
for information (see B-X, 9.2.6). 
5. Relevant date for documents cited in the search report; filing and 
priority date 
5.1 Verification of claimed priority dates 
Where the validity of a priority claim cannot be verified at the search stage 
(see B-XI, 4), the filing date of the European patent application accorded by 
the Receiving Section must be taken as the relevant date for the search. 
(However, see B-VI, 3 on the relevant date for the search for conflicting 
applications.) 
5.2 Intermediate documents 
The search division takes documents published between the priority date 
and the filing date of the searched application into account and labels them 
as such in the search report (see B-X, 9.2.4). For identifying what 
documents can be considered when an application has more than one 
priority date, the earliest date applies. When selecting which documents to 
cite in the search report, the search division refers to these dates and 
preferably chooses a document published before the priority date. For 
example, if there are two equally relevant documents, one published before 
the priority date and the other after that date but before the filing date, the 
search division will choose the former (see B-IV, 3.1, second paragraph). 
Art. 139(2) 
Art. 80 
Rule 40 
Art. 90(3) 
Art. 54(2) 
Part B – Chapter VI-4 

 
5.3 Doubts about the validity of the priority claim; widening of the 
search 
The examining division is responsible for checking whether and to what 
extent the priority claim is justified. However, if its search uncovers 
intermediate state of the art (see B-VI, 5.2) or potential state of the art 
under Art. 54(3), the search division will, if possible, check the validity of the 
priority claim (see B-XI, 4, F-VI, 1.2 to F-VI, 1.5 and F-VI, 2). Similarly, if it 
finds a document showing that a priority claim might not be justified (e.g. an 
earlier application or patent belonging to the same applicant and 
suggesting that the application from which priority is claimed may not be 
the first application for the invention concerned), it will cite this document in 
the search report (see B-X, 9.2.8). However, it will not normally carry out 
any special search for such documents and will do so only if it has a 
particular 
reason, 
e.g. when 
the 
priority 
application 
is 
a 
"continuation-in-part" of an earlier application from which no priority is 
claimed (see B-IV, 2.3 and F-VI, 2.4.4). Sometimes the fact that the 
applicant's country of residence is different from the priority application's 
country of filing can also be an indication that it is not a first filing and so 
justify widening the search to some extent. 
If the search is widened this way, it will cover: 
(i) 
published patent documents filed earlier than the claimed priority 
date 
Example 1 (assuming that the applicant is the same for all 
applications) 
Date 
Application 
Subject-matter 
01.03.98 
GB1 filed 
A 
30.05.98 
GB2 filed 
A 
30.05.99 
EP1 filed 
(claiming priority of GB2) 
A 
10.09.99 
GB1 published 
A 
During the search for EP1, the search division found published 
application GB1. GB1 was filed earlier than GB2 and so may 
prejudice the priority claim of EP1. The search division therefore cites 
published GB1 in the search report as an "L" document 
(see B-X, 9.2.8(a)). 
(ii) 
published patent documents which claim priority from an application 
filed before the searched application's priority date 
Example 2 (assuming that the applicant is the same for all 
applications) 
Date 
Application 
Subject-matter 
01.03.98 
GB1 filed 
A 
30.05.98 
GB2 filed 
A 
01.03.99 
US1 filed 
A 
 

Part B – Chapter VI-5 
(claiming priority of GB1) 
30.05.99 
EP1 filed 
(claiming priority of GB2) 
A 
15.04.00 
US1 published 
A 
The publication US1 was found during the search on EP1. GB1 was 
filed earlier than GB2 and so may prejudice the priority of EP1. The 
search division therefore cites US1, which claims priority from GB1, 
in the search report as an "L" document (see B-X, 9.2.8(a)). 
5.4 Documents published after the filing date 
The search normally does not cover documents published after the filing 
date of the application accorded by the Receiving Section. 
However, documents published after the filing date can sometimes be 
relevant, for example written confirmation of an oral disclosure 
(see B-VI, 2), a later document setting out the principle or theory behind the 
invention and so helping to understand it better or a later document 
showing that the reasoning or the facts behind the invention are incorrect 
(see B-X, 9.2.5). The search is not specially widened to include documents 
of this kind, but the search division may choose to cite any it knows of in 
the search report. 
If priority is validly claimed (see B-VI, 5.1), the search also does not 
normally cover documents published after the earliest validly claimed 
priority date as that date counts under Art. 89 as the application's filing 
date. However, the search may have to be widened this way to some 
extent for specific purposes (see B-VI, 3, B-VI, 4 and B-VI, 5.3). 
5.5 Non-prejudicial disclosures 
Disclosures of the invention are disregarded if they happened less than six 
months before the European patent application was filed (see G 3/98 and 
G 2/99) and if they were due either to an evident abuse in relation to the 
applicant or the legal predecessor or due to display at an official, or 
officially recognised, international exhibition. Nevertheless, the search 
division does cite in the search report any documents it has reason to 
believe fall within one of the categories mentioned in B-X, 9.2.8. For these 
documents too, the relevant date for the search will be the filing date of the 
application (see B-VI, 5.1 and B-XI, 4). Since abuse will generally only be 
asserted after the search report and search opinion (if applicable ‒ 
see B-XI, 7) have been sent, and disclosure at an exhibition involves the 
question whether the displayed invention and the claimed invention are 
identical, both matters will be investigated by the examining division. 
5.6 Doubts about the state of the art 
It is the examining division, not the search division, that ultimately decides 
on novelty (see B-III, 1.1), and so the search division does not disregard 
highly relevant documents because it has doubts about, for instance, when 
exactly they were published or made publicly available (e.g. standards or 
related preparatory documents, see G-IV, 7.6) or, where they refer to an 
oral disclosure, exhibition, etc., what exactly was said or displayed. It tries 
to remove any such doubts but always cites the documents in the search 
Art. 55(1)(a) and (b) 
Rule 25 
Part B – Chapter VI-6 

 
report anyway, while continuing its search as though they had not been 
found. It can also cite additional documents providing evidence on the 
matters in doubt (see B-X, 9.2.8). It will explain any such matters in detail in 
the search opinion. 
Any date of publication indicated in a document is accepted as correct 
unless there is good reason to challenge it, e.g. where the search division 
can show it was published earlier or where the applicant can show in 
examination proceedings that it was published later. If the indicated date of 
publication is not precise enough (e.g. because only a month or year is 
given) to establish whether it was published before the relevant date for the 
search, the search division will try to determine the exact date or at least 
narrow it down with enough precision to establish this. A date of receipt at 
the EPO stamped on the document or a reference in another document, 
which must then be cited (see B-X, 9.2.8), can help with this. Whether a 
document was publicly available may be investigated when the search 
opinion is drawn up and during substantive examination (see C-IV, 1). 
Where, despite the search division's attempts, the date is still not precise 
enough for it to know whether or not the document was published before or 
after the priority or filing date, it will cite it as though it had been published 
on the earliest possible date. For instance, if only the month and year of 
publication are known, the search division will cite it as having been 
published on the first day of that month. 
6. Contents of prior-art disclosures 
6.1 General remark 
As a general rule, the search division cites only documents which are 
available in the search documentation or which it can access in some other 
way. 
6.2 Citation of documents corresponding to documents not available 
or not published in one of the EPO's official languages 
In certain circumstances, the search division can cite a document without 
having verified its content if it has good reason to assume that it is identical 
in content to another document which it has inspected. Both documents are 
then mentioned in the search report as described at the end of B-X, 9.1.2. 
For example, where a document published in a non-EPO language before 
the filing date has been selected for citation, the search division may 
instead have inspected a corresponding document in an official EPO 
language (e.g. another member of the same patent family or a translation of 
an article) and possibly published after the filing date. Unless the contrary is 
explicitly stated, it can also be assumed that an abstract's contents are 
included in the original document, just as it is normally assumed that what 
is said in a report of an oral presentation matches what was presented. 
Before citing a document written in a language it is not familiar with, the 
search division must make sure it is relevant (e.g. by using a machine 
translation, a translation by a colleague, a corresponding document or an 
abstract in a familiar language, by referring to a drawing or chemical 
formula in the document to be cited or by consulting database indexes 
relating to that document's technical content (see B-X, 9.1.3)). 
 

Part B – Chapter VI-7 
6.3 Conflict between abstract and source document 
Where there is a problem with an abstract, either because it appears to 
conflict with its source document or because it conflicts with other abstracts 
of the same source document, the search division will proceed as follows: 
(i) 
it will cite the source document if it is in a language it can readily 
understand (especially one of an EPC contracting state) and either 
directly available to it or easy to obtain. 
(ii) 
it will cite the abstract if the source document is in a language it 
cannot readily understand (e.g. Russian, Japanese, Korean or 
Chinese) and/or is difficult to obtain. If more than one abstract is 
available, it will cite the one most relevant to the claimed invention 
even if it conflicts with the other abstracts or the source document. 
The source document will be mentioned in the search report as the 
"&" document of the cited abstract. Where it is available but is in a 
language the search division cannot readily understand (e.g. Japanese), 
both it and the abstract will be made available to the applicant and included 
in the file (see B-X, 9.1.2). The search division must explain in the search 
opinion why it thinks there is a conflict. 
Where an abstract conflicts with the source document to such an extent 
that it is incorrect, it is not treated as prior art, and the source document is 
considered to be the state of the art instead (T 77/87). However, for the 
purposes of the search report and opinion, an abstract is assumed to truly 
reflect the source document's content unless the discrepancy between the 
two is obvious. Since the abstract, the source document and a machine 
translation of the source document are all made available (see B-X, 9.1.3 
and 12), the applicant can compare their disclosures and form an opinion 
on whether the abstract is technically accurate. They will still have an 
opportunity to refute the above assumption at the examination stage (e.g. 
by providing a translation of the source document). 
6.4 Insufficient prior-art disclosures 
The search division generally assumes that any technical subject-matter in 
a prior-art document is sufficiently disclosed and so part of the state of the 
art. Even if there is some doubt about this, it will still be cited in the search 
report as normal and relied on as a basis for an objection in the search 
opinion. It will be disregarded only if its disclosure is obviously insufficient 
(see G-IV, 2). 
6.5 Incorrect compound records in online databases 
If the search division finds a compound when searching a database created 
by abstracting source documents (e.g. patents, journal articles or books) 
and identifying the chemical compounds disclosed in them but, on reading 
the source document, cannot find the compound, this does not 
automatically mean that there has been a mistake and that the compound 
is not disclosed in the document. For example, compounds which are 
named but whose structures are not drawn are still part of the disclosure 
and will be abstracted. In addition, database providers use standard 
nomenclature in their database records, whereas authors of technical 
Part B – Chapter VI-8 

 
literature frequently do not, and so the database record may use a different 
nomenclature for the compound from the source document. 
However, if the search division really is unable to find the compound in the 
source document, but the compound is relevant for assessing patentability, 
it may write to the database provider to ask why the compound was 
included in the abstract and where it is disclosed in the source. If the 
database provider has not replied by the time the search report is drafted, 
the document will be cited in the search report and in the search opinion on 
the assumption that it does disclose the compound, but the search division 
will also continue the search as though the compound did not exist. 
7. Internet disclosures ‒ technical journals 
For some technical journals, the publisher's website displays the date when 
they were published online, especially if it differs from the date when they 
were published on paper (OJ EPO 2009, 456). There are various possible 
scenarios where a journal was published online (see G-IV, 7.5.3.1). In all 
cases, the search division makes a copy of the journal web page where the 
(electronic and paper) publication and pre-publication date or dates of the 
article or issue are mentioned and then cites it in the search report as an 
"L" document. It is best to do so as soon as the evidence is found and not 
leave it until later, since the information may be moved or removed from the 
website in the time between search and substantive examination. 
 

Part B – Chapter VII-1 
Chapter VII – Unity of invention 
1. General remarks 
The requirement of unity of invention has a regulatory function and is 
intended to promote an efficient procedure up to grant (T 110/82 and 
F-V, 6). It would be unfair to treat applications as meeting this requirement 
where, because of their diverse content, they cost much more than average 
to process, especially in terms of search, since some of this extra cost 
would have to be covered by fees paid for other applications. Another 
aspect is that an application's content should be readily understandable, 
which will not always be the case where its subject-matter is very diverse. 
On the other hand, the general purpose of dealing with linked substantive 
issues in a single procedure would not be achieved if the provisions on 
unity of invention were applied too strictly, and so interconnected 
subject-matter must not be split up needlessly (see F-V). 
1.1 Partial European search report 
If the search division considers that a European patent application lacks 
unity of invention (see F-V, 1), it must carry out a search, and draw up a 
partial European search report under Rule 64(1), for those parts which 
relate to the invention (or unitary group of inventions) first mentioned in the 
claims (see F-V, 3.4). The partial European search report is accompanied 
by a list of the separate inventions identified. 
For more on the search opinion in cases where there is a lack of unity of 
invention, see B-XI, 5. 
1.2 Invitation to pay further search fees 
The search division will inform the applicant of the lack of unity of invention 
in a communication accompanying its partial search report and invite them 
to pay a further search fee for each invention other than the one first 
mentioned in the claims if they want the search to cover these inventions as 
well. Together with this invitation, the applicant will receive a provisional 
opinion on the patentability of the invention or unitary group of inventions 
first mentioned in the claims (see F-V, 3.4) and the reasons for the 
non-unity findings. This provisional opinion is for information only and the 
applicant does not need to reply to the points raised in it. If the applicant 
nevertheless submits a reply, the search division will not take it into account 
when drawing up the extended European search report (see the notice 
from the EPO dated 3 March 2017, OJ EPO 2017, A20). 
1.2.1 General 
The further search fees must be paid within two months (Rule 64(1)). 
Applicants using the automatic debiting procedure must inform the EPO 
within this period if they do not want some or even any of the other 
inventions to be searched, because otherwise further search fees for all of 
them will be debited automatically on the last day. 
(a) 
If the applicant does not pay any further search fees in time, there 
will be no further search and the partial search report will become the 
final search report, which is accompanied by the search opinion. 
Rule 64 
Rule 64(1) 
Point 6.1 AAD 
Part B – Chapter VII-2 

 
Nevertheless, the final decision on unity of invention is taken by the 
examining division or – in the event of an appeal – ultimately by the 
board of appeal (B-VII, 1.4 and C-III, 3.2.1). 
(b) 
If the applicant pays further search fees for any of the remaining 
inventions or groups of inventions in time, a further search will be 
carried out on those inventions. The final search report will then be 
drawn up for all inventions for which search fees have been paid, i.e. 
the first one and the ones included in the further search. If the 
application does not meet the EPC requirements as regards any of 
the inventions for which further search fees have been paid, this will 
be mentioned in the search opinion. For example: invention 1 was 
searched and the applicant paid a further search fee for invention 3. 
The subject-matter of invention 3 was found to lack novelty. The 
search opinion will then cover invention 1 and object to a lack of 
novelty for the subject-matter of invention 3. 
1.2.2 Cascading non-unity 
If a European patent application is found to lack unity at the search stage, 
the invention first mentioned in the claims (see F-V, 3.4) will be searched 
and the applicant will be invited to pay further search fees for the others. 
They will also be warned that, even if a lack of unity "a posteriori" is later 
detected, no further invitation to pay additional fees will be issued. 
If the applicant pays further search fees for any of the other inventions, a 
search is carried out for those inventions. 
If this further search reveals that one or more of these inventions also lack 
unity "a posteriori", only the first invention in each group of inventions is 
searched. The applicant will not be invited to pay another set of further 
search fees. 
The search division will draw up the search opinion, setting out the reasons 
for its finding of non-unity and giving an opinion on the patentability of the 
searched inventions (see B-XI, 5). 
Divisional applications can be filed for any inventions that have not been 
searched (see C-IX, 1.2). 
Example 
The search division raises a lack of unity objection and identifies four 
different inventions A, B, C, D. The first invention A is searched and the 
applicant is invited to pay further search fees for inventions B, C and D. The 
warning mentioned above is given. 
The applicant pays two further search fees for inventions B and C. During 
the further search, B is found to lack unity "a posteriori" and is divided into 
groups of inventions B1, B2 and B3. 
In this case only B1 and C are searched. The European search opinion 
must fully explain why the claims of the application were divided into A, B, 
 

Part B – Chapter VII-3 
C and D and why B was then subdivided into B1, B2 and B3 and offer a 
view on whether A, B1 and C are patentable. 
Examination of the application in the European phase will be based on 
either A, B1 or C (see C-III, 3.2.2). The claims relating to inventions B2, B3 
and D can be filed as divisional applications (see C-IX, 1.2). 
1.2.3 The applicant has not paid all further search fees 
The applicant always has to clearly state which inventions the further 
search fees have been paid for. If the applicant pays only some, but not all, 
of the requested further search fees and does not indicate which inventions 
these fees are for, the search division will attempt to find out which 
inventions are to be covered by its further search or searches. 
1.3 Documents relevant only to other inventions 
The search on the invention first mentioned in the claims may also uncover 
documents that are relevant only to the other inventions. These documents 
do not necessarily have to be included in the partial European search 
report unless they are the basis for an objection to lack of unity "a 
posteriori" (see F-V, 5 and 7). 
1.4 Assessment and possible review of the unity requirement 
A search division dealing with unity at the search stage applies the same 
criteria as are used in substantive examination (see F-V). In particular, it 
will not raise an objection of lack of unity merely because the inventions 
claimed are classed in separate classification groups, or simply as a way of 
restricting the search to certain parts of the documentation, for example 
certain classification groups (but see B-V, 3.3). 
The assessment of unity at the search stage is not definitive. Normally, the 
search division will have formed a first impression even before it carries out 
the search, but it will necessarily have done so prima facie, based on the 
common general knowledge in the relevant field and the prior art mentioned 
in the application. It will revisit this initial assessment during and after the 
search in the light of the documents found. Its findings will be reviewed 
again when substantive examination begins and even the position taken 
then may be changed later on in the proceedings in the light of new facts 
and evidence. 
However, as a general rule, a position already taken on unity of invention is 
maintained unless there are sound reasons for changing it. The final 
decision on the matter is taken by the examining division or – in the event 
of an appeal – ultimately by the board of appeal. So any previous finding on 
unity is basically always open to review. 
2. Procedures in cases of lack of unity 
2.1 Request for refund of further search fees 
At the examination stage, the applicant may challenge the finding of 
non-unity and request a refund of one or more of the further search fees 
paid. If the examining division finds that the challenge is justified, the fee or 
fees in question will be refunded (see, however, B-XI, 1.2). 
Rule 64(2) 
Rule 164(5) 
Part B – Chapter VII-4 

 
2.2 Complete search despite lack of unity 
In some exceptional cases ‒ especially where the lack of unity was not 
immediately apparent and is detected "a posteriori" and the different 
inventions identified are conceptually very close ‒ the extra work and cost 
involved in carrying out a complete search and drawing up a search opinion 
(where applicable – see B-XI, 7) for all the inventions is only negligible. In 
such cases, the search division carries out the search on the other 
inventions at the same time as the one on the invention first mentioned in 
the claims and includes all the results in a single search report, in which it 
objects to the lack of unity and identifies the different inventions. It will also 
point out that it did not invite the applicant to pay further search fees 
because it was able to search all the claims without the extra work that 
would justify them. However, the search opinion (if applicable ‒ see B-XI, 7) 
will still raise the objection to the lack of unity of invention (see B-XI, 5). 
2.3 Supplementary European search 
If a lack of unity of invention comes to light during a supplementary 
European search following an international (PCT) search, a partial 
supplementary European search report is drawn up on the invention or 
group of inventions first mentioned in the claims (see F-V, 3.4) on which the 
supplementary European search was based (Rule 164(1)(a)), irrespective 
of the ISA's findings on unity of invention. Together with this partial search 
report, the applicant will be invited to pay a further search fee for each 
invention other than the one first mentioned in the claims (Rule 164(1)(b)), 
i.e. the same procedure is followed as for the non-unity invitation issued 
under Rule 64(1) for direct European patent applications (see B-VII, 1.2). 
The applicant will also receive a provisional opinion on the patentability of 
the invention or unitary group of inventions first mentioned in the claims, 
which will include the reasons for the non-unity findings. 
3. Lack of unity and Rule 62a or Rule 63 
The procedures for dealing with cases of lack of unity in which Rule 63 or 
Rule 62a applies are dealt with in B-VIII, 3.4 and 4.5 respectively. 
Art. 153(7) 
Rule 164(1) 
 

Part B – Chapter VIII-1 
Chapter VIII – Subject-matter to be excluded 
from the search 
1. General remarks 
The subject-matter listed in Rule 39.1 PCT can be regarded as excluded 
from the scope of a European search under the EPC too, i.e. on the basis 
that it is not susceptible of industrial application (Art. 57), is excluded from 
patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3) in so far as the European patent 
application relates to it as such or falls under one of the exceptions to 
patentability in Art. 53(b) and (c). The claims are not searched in so far as 
they relate to such subject-matter (for the procedure for limiting the search 
under Rule 63, see B-VIII, 3.1 to 3.4). For the specific case of compositions 
for use in methods of treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or 
therapy, or diagnostic methods practised on the human or animal body, 
see B-VIII, 2.1 below. 
The examining division is responsible for taking a final decision on whether 
the subject-matter is patentable, but the search division will also form a 
view on this for the purpose of drafting the search opinion (if applicable ‒ 
see B-XI, 7) and also in considering whether or not it needs to limit the 
search and apply the procedure under Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3.1 to 3.4). 
This means that it too has to consider the patentability requirements other 
than novelty and inventive step (see G-II and G-III). 
It may be that potentially non-patentable subject-matter is found in only 
some of the claims or only part of a claim. This will then be indicated in the 
invitation under Rule 63(1) and in any subsequent partial search report or 
declaration replacing the search report under Rule 63(2). 
2. Considerations relating to specific exclusions from and 
exceptions to patentability 
2.1 Methods for treatment of the human or animal body by surgery 
or therapy and diagnostic methods practised on the human or animal 
body 
Even where a claim is drafted as a method of medical treatment 
(see G-II, 4.2) and is therefore not directed to patentable subject-matter, a 
meaningful search may be possible if the determinant technical feature is 
the effect of the substance, which can be searched. The procedure under 
Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 to 3.4) will then be unnecessary. For example, 
method claims can be worded as follows: 
"A method of treating dementia by administering a compound of formula X 
to a patient" 
or 
"A method of diagnosis of disease Y practised on the human/animal body, 
comprising steps A, B and C" 
Art. 52(2) and 
(3) 
Art. 53 
Art. 57 
Rule 63 
Art. 52 
Rule 63 
Part B – Chapter VIII-2 

 
These method claims are excluded from patentability under Art. 53(c), but 
the applicant will usually be able to reword them in an allowable form during 
the examination proceedings (see G-II, 4.2). They are therefore searched 
since they are usually characterised by the effect of substance X, by one or 
more of steps A, B and C not directly practised on the human or animal 
body or by the use of reagents rather than by the act of therapy or 
diagnosis on the human/animal body. 
If, however, a claim includes specific method features (e.g. a combination 
of pharmaceutical and physical treatment), a meaningful search may not be 
possible. If in doubt, the search division will issue an invitation under 
Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3.1). But, regardless of whether such claims are 
searched or not, the applicant will be informed in the search opinion (if 
applicable ‒ see B-XI, 7) that the subject-matter in question is excluded 
from patentability (see B-XI, 3). 
2.2 Subject-matter excluded from patentability under Art. 52(2) 
and (3) 
Subject-matter or activities listed in Art. 52(2), when taken as such 
(Art. 52(3)), are considered non-technical (G-II, 1 and 2). If a claim contains 
a mix of technical and non-technical features, the search division identifies 
which features contribute to the technical character of the claimed 
subject-matter (see G-VII, 5.4) and its search covers all those features. 
Features that appear to be non-technical when taken in isolation may still 
contribute to the technical character of a claimed invention if, in the context 
of that invention, they help to produce a technical effect that has a technical 
purpose. Merely implementing effects that are inherent in the excluded 
subject-matter (T 1543/06) or that result from circumventing the technical 
problem rather than contributing to its technical solution does not qualify as 
a technical effect (T 258/03). Examples of how to evaluate contribution to 
technical character for each of the items listed in Art. 52(2) are provided in 
G-II, 3.1-3.7. 
Claimed features are analysed in the light of the description and drawings 
to determine whether they produce a technical effect and contribute to a 
technical solution to a technical problem (see B-III, 3.2 and B-IV, 1.1). In 
particular, specific embodiments disclosed in the description and drawings 
‒ to which the claims might reasonably be expected to be limited 
(see B-III, 3.5) ‒ are taken into account since they could confer technical 
character on the claimed features. 
If the search division considers that some claim features do not contribute 
to the technical character of the claimed invention, it will state this in the 
search opinion. If it objects to a lack of inventive step and at least some of 
the distinguishing features are found not to have a technical effect 
contributing to the solution of a technical problem (see G-VII, 5.4), it will 
substantiate this finding. 
2.2.1 Computer-implemented business methods 
If the features contributing to the technical character of the subject-matter 
of claims directed to computer-implemented business methods are so 
 

Part B – Chapter VIII-3 
well-known that their existence at the relevant date cannot reasonably be 
disputed (T 1411/08, Reasons 4.1 and 4.2, and T 690/06, Reasons 13), the 
search division does not have to cite any documentary evidence of the 
relevant state of the art in the search report, because they then amount to 
"notorious" knowledge, for which no such evidence is needed. "Notorious 
knowledge" is not to be confused with the skilled person's common general 
knowledge, which is something that generally can be reasonably 
challenged (G-VII, 2 and 3.1). In such exceptional cases, a search report 
with 
no 
cited 
documents 
may 
be 
issued 
under 
Rule 61 
(OJ EPO 2007, 592). This is not the same thing as issuing a declaration of 
no search or a partial search report under Rule 63(2). 
3. No meaningful search possible 
In addition to the reasons discussed in B-VIII, 1, an invitation under 
Rule 63(1) may be issued and the search subsequently limited under 
Rule 63(2) because the application falls so short of the relevant EPC 
requirements that it is impossible to carry out a meaningful search on all or 
some of the claims or part of a claim. The search division then applies the 
procedure under Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 to 3.4 and OJ EPO 2009, 533). 
Rule 63 relates only to whether the search is practicable and not to whether 
its results are likely to be relevant in the later examination proceedings. 
Even if a search will not produce any result that could be used in 
examination proceedings, it cannot be refused on the basis of Rule 63 
(see T 1242/04). 
What is or is not "meaningful" is a question of fact to be answered by the 
search division. Its finding may change in the light of any reply from the 
applicant to the invitation under Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3.2). How the 
search division exercises its discretion will depend on the facts of the case. 
A restriction of the search must be carefully considered. There are cases 
where a search is impossible in practice in view of the failure to meet the 
EPC requirements, for example a fundamental lack of clarity or the 
absence of any technical character whatsoever. However, the word 
"meaningful" must always be construed reasonably, i.e. Rule 63 cannot be 
invoked simply because a search is difficult or does not produce results 
relevant for subsequent examination proceedings. 
As there is no legal provision requiring that applicants draft their application 
in a way that makes searching easier, "procedural economy" cannot be 
used as a reason, or part of a reason, for issuing a partial search report 
(see also T 1020/98). 
The following – non-exhaustive – examples illustrate where Rule 63 can 
apply: 
(i) 
claims lacking support; insufficient disclosure 
An example is a claim so broadly formulated that its scope is at least 
to some extent speculative, i.e. not supported by the disclosure of the 
application. It is then so broad that a meaningful search cannot be 
carried out over its whole scope but only on the basis of the 
Rule 63 
Part B – Chapter VIII-4 

 
narrower, disclosed invention. In extreme cases, this may mean a 
search covering only (one or more of) the specific examples 
disclosed in the description. The procedure under Rule 63(1) can 
then be applied (see B-VIII, 3.1 to B-VIII, 3.4) on the basis of a failure 
to meet the requirements of sufficiency of disclosure and support set 
out in Art. 83 and 84 (see F-III, 1 and 2, and F-IV, 6). However, the 
search division needs to bear in mind that whether these 
requirements are met has to be assessed from the point of view of 
the person skilled in the art. 
(ii) 
claims lacking conciseness 
An example is where there are so many claims, or so many 
possibilities within a claim, that it is unduly burdensome to determine 
the subject-matter for which protection is sought (however, 
see B-VIII, 4 on multiple independent claims in the same category). A 
complete search (or even any search at all) may then be impossible 
in practice. Again, it may be appropriate to apply Rule 63 and then 
issue a partial search report (following the procedures described in 
B-VIII, 3.1 to 3.3) or a declaration of no search, on the grounds that 
the claims are so lacking in conciseness that a meaningful search is 
impossible (see Art. 84; F-IV, 5). 
(iii) 
claims lacking clarity 
An example is where the parameter chosen by the applicant to define 
the invention makes a meaningful comparison with the prior art 
impossible, for example because the prior art did not use the same 
parameter or did not use any parameter at all. The applicant's 
parameter may then lack clarity (see Art. 84; F-IV, 4.11) and it may 
even be so unclear that a meaningful search of the claims, an 
individual claim or part of an individual claim is impossible. It may 
then be appropriate to apply Rule 63 and issue a partial search 
report (or, in exceptional cases, no search report at all) under 
Rule 63(2) (following the procedures described in B-VIII, 3.1 to 3.3) 
after restricting the search to the worked examples, in so far as they 
can be understood, or to the way in which the desired parameter is 
obtained (any reply from the applicant to the invitation under 
Rule 63(1) would then be taken into account as described in 
B-VIII, 3.2 to determine the subject-matter to be searched). 
(iv) 
claims contravening Art. 76 or Art. 123(2) 
Rule 63 may also apply in the following cases of claims containing 
added subject-matter (see B-VIII, 6): 
– 
claims in divisional applications contravening Art. 76 
– 
applications for which the claims were filed after the filing date 
and which contravene Art. 123(2) or 
 

Part B – Chapter VIII-5 
– 
Euro-PCT applications for which amended claims were filed as 
a basis for the supplementary European search and which 
contravene Art. 123(2). 
These examples are not exhaustive (see also B-VIII, 6). The basic principle 
is that it needs to be clear and transparent for both the applicant and third 
parties what has and has not been searched. 
How these Rule 63 cases are handled in subsequent examination 
proceedings is dealt with in H-II, 5 and H-IV, 4.1.1. 
3.1 Invitation to indicate subject-matter for search 
If the search division considers that the application falls so short of the EPC 
requirements that it cannot carry out a meaningful search into the state of 
the art on the basis of all or some of the subject-matter claimed 
(see B-VIII, 1, 2 and 3), it will invite the applicant to file, within two months, 
a statement indicating the subject-matter to be searched. The invitation will 
also give the reasons for this finding and may additionally indicate the 
claimed subject-matter on which the search division considers it feasible to 
base a meaningful search. 
In the particular case of medical method claims, the search division issues 
a complete search report only when the claims can easily be reworded to 
comprise patentable subject-matter (see B-VIII, 2.1). If, on the other hand, it 
plans to issue a partial search report (or a declaration of no search), it must 
first send an invitation (e.g. for the claims that cannot easily be reworded). 
3.2 Reply to the invitation under Rule 63(1) 
3.2.1 No or late reply 
If applicants do not reply to the invitation under Rule 63(1) in time, the 
search division will take its own decision on what to search. It will then draw 
up a partial search report for what it searched or, in exceptional cases, 
issue a declaration of no search. As the limitation of the search has 
consequences in examination (see H-II, 5 and H-IV, 4.1.1), any late-filed 
reply will be included in the file for consideration at that stage because it 
may be useful for reviewing the search division's arguments for carrying out 
an incomplete search. 
Given that the search report should be published with the application, 
applicants cannot request further processing if they miss the two-month 
period under Rule 63, but they can request re-establishment of rights 
(see OJ EPO 2009, 533). 
3.2.2 Reply in time 
If applicants reply to the invitation under Rule 63(1) in time and the search 
division considers it possible to carry out a meaningful search based on the 
subject-matter they have indicated, it will search that subject-matter. 
If applicants reply to the invitation under Rule 63(1) in time but the indicated 
subject-matter still cannot be fully searched, the search division will take its 
own decision on what to search, but will keep to what was indicated in the 
Rule 63(1), (2) 
Rule 63(2) 
Part B – Chapter VIII-6 

 
applicant's reply as far as possible. In exceptional cases, it may find that no 
meaningful search is possible at all. 
Statements consisting of reworded claims filed in reply to an invitation 
under Rule 63(1) are not considered amended claims within the meaning of 
Rule 137(1) but treated merely as explanations of the originally filed claims. 
The applicant must formally introduce these reworded claims into the 
proceedings by confirming that this is what they want within the time limit 
under Rule 70(1) or (2). The confirmation can be filed either together with 
the reply to the extended European search report (Rules 70a(1) and (2)) or, 
where applicable, when complying with the requirements under Rule 70(1) 
or (2). As far as possible, the search division will draw up the search report 
in the light of these explanations. Both the search report and the search 
opinion must clearly indicate what has been searched. 
Instead of indicating the subject-matter to be searched, applicants can reply 
to the invitation under Rule 63(1) by simply arguing why they believe a 
meaningful search can be carried out on all of the subject-matter claimed. If 
the search division is convinced by the applicant's arguments, it will issue a 
full search report. The search will therefore not be limited and there will be 
none of the associated consequences in examination. But if it is not 
convinced, or is only partially convinced, it will take its own decision on 
what to search and then issue a partial search report or, in exceptional 
cases, a declaration of no search. The examining division has final 
responsibility for deciding whether it was appropriate to send an invitation 
under Rule 63 and issue a declaration of no search or a partial search 
report at the search stage and it may find that it has to carry out an 
additional search (see C-IV, 7.3). 
Applicants can also reply to an invitation under Rule 63 by arguing against 
the findings there and ‒ as a main request ‒ asking the search division to 
fully search the claims as filed and ‒ as an alternative, in case the search 
division is still not convinced ‒ indicating specific subject-matter they would 
like to have searched (see also H-III, 3.2). 
A consultation may take place if the applicant phones the search division to 
enquire about the course of action after an invitation under Rule 63 has 
been sent. The consultation is limited to formal issues concerning the 
content of the invitation and the options available to the applicant. The 
search division writes minutes of the consultation and sends them to the 
applicant (without setting any time limit) for information only. The 
consultation itself does not count as a valid reply to the invitation and so the 
applicant still has to file a written reply within the time limit set there. 
3.3 Content of the extended European search report (EESR) 
In the two parts of the EESR, i.e. the search report (or the declaration of no 
search replacing it) and the search opinion, the search division will explain 
why it found under Rule 63 that it could not carry out a meaningful search 
on some or all of the claimed subject-matter and specify what 
subject-matter it did search (if any) following the procedures described in 
B-VIII, 3.2. In the search opinion, it will also invite the applicant to limit the 
claims to this searched subject-matter (in order to comply with Rule 63(3)). 
 

Part B – Chapter VIII-7 
The documents cited in the search report and referred to in the search 
opinion will relate only to this subject-matter. Even if the searched 
subject-matter meets the EPC requirements (in particular in that it is novel, 
inventive and industrially applicable, but also in that it meets the other 
conditions, such as clarity under Art. 84), the search opinion will still be 
negative, because the claims do not meet these requirements across their 
whole scope. 
Similarly, if the applicant replies to the invitation under Rule 63(1) by 
disputing the finding that a meaningful search is impossible (see B-VIII, 3.2) 
but the search division still disagrees, it will explain why in the search 
opinion, referring directly to the applicant's reply if necessary. 
3.4 Applications falling under Rule 63 and lacking unity 
There are cases where the application not only falls so short of the EPC 
requirements that it is impossible to carry out a meaningful search into the 
state of the art based on some of the subject-matter claimed 
(B-VIII, 1, 2 and 3) but also lacks unity of invention under Art. 82 and 
Rule 44. Sometimes it is enough for the search division to raise only unity 
of 
invention 
and 
send 
an 
invitation 
under 
Rule 64(1) 
(see B-VII, 1.1 and 1.2), for example where a large number of claims 
results in a serious lack of conciseness but this can be resolved by splitting 
the claims up into the different inventions. 
In other cases, however, the search division may need to apply the 
procedures under both Rule 64(1) (i.e. invite the applicant to pay further 
search fees for inventions other than the one first mentioned in the claims) 
and Rule 63(1) (i.e. invite the applicant to indicate the subject-matter to be 
searched). If so, it will send the applicant the Rule 63(1) invitation first. 
Where the lack of unity is already apparent, this invitation will also identify 
the invention (or group of inventions) first mentioned in the claims ("first 
invention" ‒ see F-V, 3.4) and the claims which relate to it, either in full or in 
part, and ask the applicant to clarify what to search in this respect. 
If the applicant has not replied by expiry of the time limit under Rule 63(1), 
any subject-matter to be searched for the first invention will be determined 
according to the procedures described in B-VIII, 3.2. A partial search report 
(or exceptionally a declaration of no search) will then be drawn up on this 
first invention and sent to the applicant, along with an invitation to pay 
further search fees under Rule 64(1) for the other inventions and a 
provisional opinion on the first invention's patentability that includes the 
reasons for the non-unity findings. Where appropriate, the invitation under 
Rule 64(1) may also include an invitation under Rule 63(1) asking the 
applicant to clarify the subject-matter to be searched for any other 
inventions for which they later pay further search fees. 
Where these exceptional circumstances arise in cases of supplementary 
European search reports for Euro-PCT applications, the procedure is the 
same, except that a Rule 164(1) invitation is sent instead of a Rule 64 
invitation. 
Rule 164 
Part B – Chapter VIII-8 

 
Rule 63 
also 
applies 
to 
searches 
performed 
under 
Rule 164(2) 
(see C-III, 3.1). As for searches on directly filed European patent 
applications, any Rule 63 objection relating to an invention for which a 
search fee has to be paid must be included in the invitation to pay that fee. 
4. More than one independent claim per category (Rule 62a) 
4.1 Invitation to indicate which independent claim to search 
If the search division considers that the claims as filed do not comply with 
Rule 43(2) (see F-IV, 3.2), it may invite the applicant to indicate compliant 
claims on which the search can be based within two months. In the same 
way as for an invitation under Rule 64, it is left to the search division's 
discretion whether to send this invitation or instead carry out a full search 
on all the claims and raise the objection under Rule 43(2) only in the written 
opinion. 
4.2 Reply to the invitation under Rule 62a(1) 
4.2.1 Failure to reply in time 
If the applicant does not indicate the claims to be searched in time, the 
search will be based on the first claim in each category. In either case, a 
partial search report will be drawn up. As the limitation of the search has 
consequences in examination (see H-II, 5 and H-IV, 4.1.1), any late-filed 
reply is included in the file for consideration at that stage, in the same way 
as is done for a late-filed reply to a Rule 63 invitation (see B-VIII, 3.2.1). 
Since the search report should be available when the application is 
published, Rule 62a requires that the applicant reply within two months and 
rules out further processing. However, a request for re-establishment of 
rights may be granted if the relevant conditions are met. 
4.2.2 Reply filed in time 
If applicants reply to the invitation under Rule 62a(1) in time by indicating 
an independent claim in a particular category that they want to have 
searched, the search division will carry out the search based on this claim. 
It is also open to applicants to indicate more than one independent claim in 
the same category if these claims fall within the exceptions in Rule 43(2) 
(see F-IV, 3.2). However, if the search division then finds that the indicated 
independent claims do not in fact fall within these exceptions, it will search 
only the one that comes first in numerical order. 
Example 
An invitation under Rule 62a(1) is sent for an application that contains 
independent product claims 1, 10 and 15. The applicant replies that 
independent product claims 10 and 15 fall within the exceptions in 
Rule 43(2) and indicates that these two claims should be searched. The 
search division disagrees, and so only claim 10 is searched. 
See B-VIII, 3.2.2 for the procedure followed where the applicant tries to file 
amendments. 
Rule 164 
Rule 62a(1) 
 

Part B – Chapter VIII-9 
Instead of indicating the independent claim or claims to be searched, 
applicants can reply to the invitation under Rule 62a(1) by simply arguing 
why they believe that the claims comply with Rule 43(2) (i.e. why the 
multiple independent claims in the same category fall within one or more of 
the exceptions in Rule 43(2)). If the search division is convinced by the 
applicant's arguments, it will issue a search report based on all the claims, 
and the consequences a limited search has at the examination stage will 
not apply. But if it is not convinced, it will issue a search report based only 
on the first independent claim in the category. The examining division has 
final responsibility for deciding whether an invitation under Rule 62a was 
appropriate. 
Applicants can also reply to an invitation under Rule 62a by arguing against 
the findings there and ‒ as a main request ‒ asking the search division to 
search all the claims as filed and ‒ as an alternative, in case the search 
division is still not convinced ‒ indicating the independent claims they would 
like to have searched (see also H-III, 3.2). 
The procedure where applicants phone the search division to enquire about 
the course of action after an invitation under Rule 62a has been sent is as 
described above for the invitation under Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.2.2). 
4.3 Content of the extended European search report (EESR) 
The search opinion will invite the applicant to limit the application to the 
claims which have been searched (Rule 62a(2)). If the applicant replied to 
the invitation under Rule 62a(1) by disputing the finding under Rule 43(2) 
(see B-VIII, 4.2) but the search division still disagrees, it will explain why in 
the search opinion. 
4.4 Cases under Rule 62a where claims fees have not been paid 
If an independent claim has been deemed to be abandoned under 
Rule 45(3) or Rule 162(4) because the claims fee has not been paid 
(see A-III, 9), the applicant cannot indicate it in reply to the invitation under 
Rule 62a(1), because it is no longer eligible for search (see B-III, 3.4). If 
such a claim is indicated, the search division will ignore this, instead 
applying Rule 62a(1), last sentence, and searching the first independent 
claim in the category in question for which claims fees have been paid. 
If all the independent claims in the category in question have been deemed 
to be abandoned because the fees were not paid, no invitation under 
Rule 62a(1) will be issued and none of them will be searched. 
4.5 Applications falling under Rule 62a and lacking unity 
There are cases where the application not only does not comply with 
Rule 43(2) (see B-VIII, 4.1 and F-IV, 3.2) but also lacks unity of invention 
under Art. 82 and Rule 44. Sometimes it is enough for the search division 
to raise only the issue of unity of invention and send an invitation under 
Rule 64(1) (see B-VII, 1.1 and 1.2). 
In other cases, however, the search division may need to apply the 
procedures under both Rule 64(1) (i.e. invite the applicant to pay further 
search fees for inventions other than the one first mentioned in the claims) 
Part B – Chapter VIII-10 

 
and Rule 62a(1) (i.e. invite the applicant to indicate the independent claims 
to be searched). It will then send the applicant the invitation under 
Rule 62a(1) first. 
Where the lack of unity is already apparent when the invitation under 
Rule 62a(1) is sent, it will also identify the invention (or group of inventions) 
first mentioned in the claims ("first invention" ‒ see F-V, 3.4) and the claims 
which relate to it, either in full or in part, and ask the applicant to indicate 
which claims to search. If the applicant has not replied by expiry of the time 
limit under Rule 62a(1), the claims to be searched for the first invention will 
be determined according to the procedures described in B-VIII, 4.2. A 
partial search report will then be drawn up on this first invention and sent to 
the applicant, along with an invitation to pay further search fees under 
Rule 64(1) for the other inventions and a provisional opinion on the first 
invention's patentability that includes the reasons for the non-unity findings. 
Where appropriate, this invitation under Rule 64(1) may also include an 
invitation under Rule 62a(1) asking the applicant to clarify the claims to be 
searched in respect of any other inventions for which they later pay further 
search fees. 
However, it can also happen that, after the invitation under Rule 62a(1) has 
been sent for all claims, the claims which comply with Rule 43(2) and so 
are searched (as determined according to the procedures in B-VIII, 4.2) are 
found to be open to an objection of lack of unity a posteriori. An invitation to 
pay further search fees under Rule 64(1) will then be sent, but only in 
relation to the subject-matter of the claims determined by the applicant's 
reply (or lack of reply) to the invitation under Rule 62a(1). 
Where these exceptional circumstances arise in cases of supplementary 
European search reports on Euro-PCT applications, the procedure is the 
same, except that a Rule 164(1) invitation is sent instead of a Rule 64 
invitation. 
Rule 62a also applies to searches performed under Rule 164(2) 
(see C-III, 3.1). As for searches on directly filed European patent 
applications, any Rule 62a objection relating to an invention for which a 
search fee has to be paid must be included in the invitation to pay that fee. 
4.6 Handling of dependent claims under Rule 62a 
Claims depending ‒ whether directly or only indirectly via other dependent 
claims ‒ on an independent claim excluded from the search in accordance 
with Rule 62a(1) (see B-VIII, 4.2) are likewise excluded from the search. 
Conversely, if a dependent claim depends on more than one preceding 
claim and not all of them were searched, it will be searched but only in so 
far as it depends on a claim or claims which were searched in accordance 
with Rule 62a(1). 
5. Invitation under both Rule 62a(1) and Rule 63(1) 
It is sometimes necessary to send an invitation under both Rule 63 
(see B-VIII, 3.1) and Rule 62a(1) (see B-VIII, 4.1), for example where 
clarifying which claim or claims to search under Rule 62a will not 
necessarily help to clarify what subject-matter to search, because the 
Rule 164 
Rule 164 
 

Part B – Chapter VIII-11 
application contains several independent claims in the same category and 
none or only some of them can be meaningfully searched over their whole 
scope. The invitations under Rule 62a(1) and Rule 63(1) are then sent 
jointly in a single communication setting the same two-month time limit for 
replying under both rules. Applicants wishing to reply to both invitations 
should do so at the same time. 
The independent claims indicated in reply to the invitation under 
Rule 62a(1) and the subject-matter indicated in reply to the invitation under 
Rule 63(1) must be compatible. If the applicant's indications are 
incompatible, the search division can choose, depending on the 
circumstances, either (i) to search the claims indicated by the applicant 
under Rule 62a(1) and, where necessary, limit the subject-matter searched 
for those claims by applying Rule 63(2) by analogy or (ii) to search that 
subject-matter defined in the first independent claim in a particular category 
which is compatible with the subject-matter indicated by the applicant under 
Rule 63(1) by applying Rule 62a(1), last sentence, by analogy. 
Although sent in the same communication, the invitations under 
Rule 62a(1) and Rule 63(1) are still legally separate. Applicants are 
therefore free to reply to only one of them. If they reply only to the 
Rule 62a(1) invitation, option (i) above applies. If they reply only to the 
Rule 63(1) invitation, option (ii) above applies. 
6. Claims contravening Art. 123(2) or Art. 76(1) 
If the claims on which the search is to be based were filed after the filing 
date or under Rule 58, they are not part of the application documents "as 
originally filed". Similarly, the supplementary European search on a 
Euro-PCT 
application 
is 
sometimes 
based 
on 
amended 
claims 
(see B-III, 3.3.1). In either case, before starting the search, the search 
division checks whether or not these claims add any subject-matter that 
goes beyond what was in the application "as originally filed" (see 
also A-III, 15). For Euro-PCT applications, this means the PCT application 
as originally filed. 
If the claims contravene Art. 123(2), the search division will face one of the 
following situations: 
(a) 
there are doubts about whether an objection can be raised (e.g. the 
amendment relies on common general knowledge and the search 
division is unsure whether the introduced term can be based on this) 
and/or the amendment does not significantly change the scope and 
subject-matter of the search: the search division then searches the 
claims as they are. 
(b) 
there are certain individual features in the claims that clearly 
contravene Art. 123(2): the search division then ignores these 
features when carrying out the search. 
(c) 
there are substantial non-allowable amendments in the claims: the 
search division may then need to issue an invitation under Rule 63(1) 
before starting the search (see B-VIII, 3(iv)). Depending on the reply 
Art. 123(2) 
Rule 58 
Part B – Chapter VIII-12 

 
to the invitation, it may issue a partial search report or even a 
declaration replacing the search report under Rule 63. In deciding 
what to include in the search and what to exclude from it, it refers to 
how the invention is defined in the description. 
A similar problem can also arise when a divisional application is filed and 
the amended claims do not meet the requirements of Art. 76(1): the same 
criteria as described in steps (a) to (c) above are then applied. 
In any case, the search opinion will include an objection under Art. 123(2) 
or Art. 76(1) and give the reasons for limiting the scope of the search. 
 

Part B – Chapter IX-1 
Chapter IX – Search documentation 
1. General 
1.1 Organisation and content of the documentation available to the 
search divisions 
The search documentation consists mainly of a collection of patent 
documents that can be systematically accessed in a way that facilitates 
searching. It also includes non-patent literature – such as periodicals and 
other technical publications – that can be accessed via in-house and 
external databases, with some items also available for consultation in a 
virtual library. Particularly relevant items of non-patent literature are 
selected for inclusion in the systematically accessible documentation. The 
systematically accessible part of the search documentation includes the 
minimum documentation that an International Searching Authority must 
consult under Rules 34 and 36.1(ii) PCT but goes beyond these minimum 
requirements. 
1.2 Means of searching systematically 
The search documentation can be searched using the Cooperative Patent 
Classification (CPC), which is based on the International Patent 
Classification (IPC) but comprises finer internal subdivisions, or using other 
classification systems and/or words. 
2. Patent documents arranged for systematic searching 
2.1 PCT minimum documentation 
The systematically accessible search documentation includes the national 
patent documents belonging to the PCT minimum documentation specified 
in Rule 34.1(b)(i) and (c) PCT. 
It also includes published international (PCT) and regional (e.g. European) 
patent 
applications, 
patents 
and 
inventors' 
certificates 
(Rule 34.1(b)(ii) PCT). 
A complete list of the contents of the PCT minimum documentation is 
available on the WIPO website. 
2.2 Unpublished patent applications 
Since it is for the examining division to complete the search for any 
conflicting applications that were still not published at the time of the initial 
search, unpublished patent applications are not among the documents 
which can be cited in the search report and so are not in the search 
documentation (see B-VI, 4.1). 
2.3 Search reports 
The official European and international (PCT) search reports are normally 
published together with the European and international applications and are 
included in the search files together with these applications. The official 
search reports for national applications are also included in these files 
where they are publicly available, as are any unofficial search reports. 
Search reports that are not normally or not yet publicly available in the form 
Part B – Chapter IX-2 

 
of a published document are available to the search division separately 
from the state-of-the-art documents, but it is not compulsory to search them 
for all applications. 
2.4 Patent family system 
The EPO keeps a patent family system based on application and priority 
data of the patent documents stored in its databases. Normally, just one 
representative document of a patent family is displayed on screen, but 
there will be links to the other family members. 
3. Non-patent literature arranged for systematic access 
3.1 Periodicals, records, reports, books, etc. 
The systematically accessible search documentation includes relevant 
articles from the list drawn up by the competent WIPO body of periodicals 
belonging to the minimum documentation under the PCT and from other 
periodicals the search divisions consider useful. Copies of the articles 
selected as relevant for search purposes are generally added to the EPO 
search databases with a fictitious country code "XP" and scanned for 
inclusion in the electronic "BNS" collection. 
The EPO also subscribes to many other periodicals, including abstract 
journals, and obtains records of conference proceedings, reports, books, 
standards, etc. in all three of its official languages and covering the various 
technically important geographical areas. Individual items are selected for 
inclusion in the online documentation if they are useful additions to the 
state of the art. 
4. Non-patent literature arranged for library-type access 
4.1 Content 
In addition to the non-patent literature mainly used for search purposes 
(see B-IX, 3), the non-patent literature arranged for library-type access also 
includes literature which the search division can use as sources of 
information and for professional development and which covers not only 
general and background technical information but also new technical 
developments. The collection also includes reports, pamphlets, etc. 
Internet-based document delivery services of publishing companies are 
available to the search division members via an electronic virtual library 
(EVL). 
5. Access to EPO documentation for the national patent offices 
The EPO provides the national offices of its member states with access to 
its electronic search documentation described in B-IX, 2.1 to 2.3. 
Access to the EPO's other documentation may be limited if it is delivered by 
commercial database providers. This depends on the conditions of data 
delivery agreed between the EPO and the individual data provider. 
However, national offices may also have their own separate agreements 
with data providers. 
 

Part B – Chapter X-1 
Chapter X – Search report 
1. General 
The search report records the results of the search. Its scope is limited in 
the following cases: 
(i) 
claims are treated as abandoned because the claims fees were not 
paid (Rule 45(3), see B-III, 3.4) 
(ii) 
no search was possible and so a declaration under Rule 63 is issued 
instead (see B-VIII) 
(iii) 
a partial search report is issued under Rule 63 and/or Rule 62a 
(see B-VIII) 
(iv) 
a partial European search report is issued owing to a lack of unity 
under Rule 64(1) 
(v) 
a supplementary European search report under Art. 153(7) is 
incomplete for the reasons given in (i) or (iii) (Rule 162(4) applies if 
there are unpaid claims fees) or is replaced by a declaration for the 
reason in (ii). 
The search reports issued in cases (i) – (iii) (and (v) where incomplete for 
one of the reasons in (i) – (iii)) are sent to the applicant, published and used 
as a basis for the examination by the examining division. A partial search 
report issued under Rule 64(1) (case (iv)) is also transmitted to the 
applicant, but not published; however, it can still be inspected by the public 
as it is included in the electronic file accessible via the European Patent 
Register (see A-XI, 2). 
Except in the cases mentioned in B-XI, 7, European search reports and 
supplementary European search reports are accompanied by a search 
opinion giving the search division's view on whether the application and the 
invention concerned seem to meet the requirements of the EPC 
(see B-XI, 1.1). Together, the European search report or supplementary 
European search report and the search opinion make up the extended 
European search report (EESR). 
The search division is responsible for drawing up the European search 
report. It is also responsible for drafting international search reports and 
search reports on behalf of the industrial property offices of some EPC 
contracting states (see B-X, 2 and B-II, 4.4 to 4.6). 
This chapter provides the information the search division needs to properly 
draw up the search report. 
A search report must not contain anything, in particular any expressions of 
opinion, reasoning, arguments or explanations, beyond what has to be 
entered on the form used and the opinions mentioned in B-III, 1.1 and 1.2 
or B-X, 9.2.8. However, this does not apply to the search opinion 
(see B-XI, 3). 
Rule 62(1) 
Part B – Chapter X-2 

 
2. Different types of search report drawn up by the EPO 
The EPO search divisions draw up the following types of search report: 
(i) 
European search reports (see B-II, 4.1) 
(ii) 
supplementary European search reports on PCT applications 
(see B-II, 4.3) 
(iii) 
"search results under Rule 164(2)" (see C-III, 3.1) 
(iv) 
international search reports under the PCT (see B-II, 4.4) 
(v) 
international-type search reports (see B-II, 4.5) 
(vi) 
search reports for national offices (see B-II, 4.6) 
(vii) 
search reports produced as part of special activities. 
The results of any additional searches carried out at the examination stage 
(see B-II, 4.2) are also recorded but are not published. However, the 
documents found may be used in the examination proceedings 
(see C-IV, 7.3). 
This chapter sets out the requirements for search reports of types (i) to (v) 
only. Nevertheless, all search reports drawn up by the EPO search 
divisions should be as similar as possible. 
3. Form and language of the search report 
3.1 Form 
The standard search report has a main page used for all searches to record 
the most important information, including: 
(i) 
the application number 
(ii) 
the application's classification 
(iii) 
the technical fields searched 
(iv) 
the relevant documents found in the search 
(v) 
the name of the search division member who carried out the search 
plus supplemental sheet A and, in certain cases, also supplemental 
sheet B. 
Supplemental sheet A is used for recording whether the title, the abstract 
as filed by the applicant and the figure to be published with the abstract 
were approved or amended and for providing the translation of the title into 
the other two official languages (see B-X, 7). 
 

Part B – Chapter X-3 
Supplemental sheet B has to be filled in if the search was restricted, 
i.e. when claims were not searched because the claims fees had not been 
paid (see B-III, 3.4), when there is a lack of unity of invention (see B-VII), 
when a meaningful search was not possible and so the search report is 
either incomplete or replaced entirely by a declaration under Rule 63 
(see B-VIII, 3) or when the search was limited under Rule 62a 
(see B-VIII, 4). 
Dates are given in the format specified in WIPO standard ST.2. 
3.2 Language 
The search report or the declaration accompanying or replacing it under 
Rule 63 is drawn up in the language of the proceedings. 
3.3 Search summary 
For in-house quality assurance purposes, the search division summarises 
all the information needed by the auditors to understand what has been 
searched (see B-III, 3), where (see B-III, 2) and how (see B-IV, 2). This 
summary of the search is not made publicly available. 
3.4 Record of search strategy 
An "Information on Search Strategy" sheet is automatically added to all 
EPO search reports. It lists the databases searched, classification symbols 
used and keywords reflecting the searched subject-matter. 
4. Identification of the European patent application and the search 
report type 
The European patent application concerned is identified on the main page 
and supplemental sheets by its application number. 
The search report type is also specified. 
Where the application and the search report are published together, the 
main page of the report is marked A1 (WIPO Standard ST.16). If the 
application is published before the search is carried out, the main page is 
marked A2 (WIPO Standard ST.16). The later search report is drawn up on 
a new main page marked A3 (WIPO Standard ST.16). If it is a 
supplementary European search report for an international application, the 
new main page is marked A4 (WIPO Standard ST.16). 
5. Classification of the European patent application 
The main page of the search report shows the IPC classification symbol or 
symbols assigned to the European patent application (see B-V, 3). 
If the application is published before the search report has been drawn up 
(A2 publication, see B-X, 4), the search division will fill in supplemental 
sheet A in time for its publication, entering all the necessary information 
mentioned in B-X, 7 and the application's IPC classification (see B-V, 3.3 
on cases where the application lacks unity). 
The IPC classification is shown again on the separately published search 
report (A3 publication, see B-X, 4). If, in the meantime, the search division 
Art. 14(3) 
Rule 61(5) 
Art. 153(7) 
Part B – Chapter X-4 

 
has changed the IPC classification initially assigned and shown on the 
A2 publication, it is the new classification that will appear on the later 
published search report (see B-V, 3.1). 
6. Technical fields searched 
Although not required by the EPC, the European search report includes the 
technical fields searched in the form of a list of IPC symbols describing 
them down to the sub-class level. 
Where the search report is based entirely or partly on a previous search 
carried out for an application relating to similar subject-matter, the report 
displays the parts of the documentation consulted for this previous search 
as the ones consulted for the application in question, again by using the 
appropriate IPC symbols. 
7. Title, abstract and figure to be published with the abstract (as 
indicated on supplemental sheet A) 
The search division fills in supplemental sheet A before publication of the 
application, regardless of whether it is going to be published with the 
search report (A1 publication) or without it (A2 publication), because the 
information entered there is needed to publish the application. 
On supplemental sheet A, the search division indicates: 
(i) 
approval or amendment of the abstract's wording, which is 
communicated to the applicant under Rule 66 (see A-III, 10). The 
search division does not study the abstract beyond ensuring that it 
relates to the application and does not conflict with the invention's 
title or the application's classification. Since the abstract has to relate 
to the application as filed, the search division will consider it and 
decide on its final wording before carrying out the search, in order to 
avoid being inadvertently influenced by the search results. 
If the search report is published separately (A3 publication), no 
information about the abstract is given on supplemental sheet A. The 
information sent to the applicant includes the invention's title and any 
figure of the drawings to be published with the abstract. 
In exceptional cases, the search division may change the abstract 
after the search but, if the application has already been published 
(A2 publication), supplemental sheet A will not be reissued. 
(ii) 
approval or amendment of the invention's title (see A-III, 7) 
(iii) 
approval, change or omission of any figure selected by the applicant 
to accompany the abstract (see F-II, 2.3(vi) and 2.4) 
(iv) 
the translation of the European patent application's title into the two 
other official languages. 
The European Patent Bulletin is published in all three of the EPO's official 
languages (Art. 14(7)(a)) and contains the entries made in the European 
Rule 47(1) 
Rule 66 
Rule 41(2)(b) 
Rule 47(4) 
Art. 14(7)(a) 
 

Part B – Chapter X-5 
Patent Register. These entries include the invention's title (Rule 143(1)(c)) 
and so it must be available in all three official languages. 
The above applies equally to applications published with the search report 
(A1 publication) and those published without it (A2 publication). In an 
A2 publication, supplemental sheet A also shows the application's 
IPC classification (see B-X, 5). In an A1 publication, the IPC classification 
appears only on the search report (Rule 61(6)). 
Supplemental sheet A also specifies whether it relates to an A1 or an 
A2 publication. 
In the case of a supplementary European search report on an international 
application, supplemental sheet A is marked A4. The search division does 
not decide on the title, abstract or figure to be published with the abstract, 
as the ISA will already have decided on them under Rules 37.2, 38 and 
8.2 PCT, respectively. 
8. Restriction of the searched subject-matter 
In the following cases, the search report, the declaration of no search or the 
partial search report will state that the search was restricted and which 
claims have or have not been searched: 
(i) 
claims above the number of fifteen for which no additional fee has 
been paid (see B-III, 3.4). This only applies to European and 
supplementary European search reports. 
(ii) 
lack of unity of invention (see B-VII). The partial search report 
(see B-VII, 1.1) points out that it has been drawn up for the invention 
first mentioned in the claims and is accompanied by a list of the 
different inventions identified which specifies their subject-matter and 
the claims or parts of claims that relate to them (see Rule 44(2). This 
applies regardless of whether the lack of unity is detected "a priori" or 
"a posteriori". Any search report later drawn up for all the inventions 
for which search fees have been paid will specify the different 
inventions searched (and the related claims or parts of claims). 
(iii) 
claims for which no meaningful search or only an incomplete search 
could be carried out (see B-VIII). The search division then declares: 
(a) 
that a meaningful search could not be carried out for any of the 
claims (this declaration replaces the search report) or 
(b) 
that a meaningful search could not be carried out for one or 
more of the claims or parts of them. The claims concerned are 
specified in this declaration, which is issued together with the 
partial search report. 
In both cases (a) and (b), the reasons for not carrying out the search 
or for restricting it must be given (e.g. subject-matter not patentable; 
insufficiently clear claims). If necessary, full reasoning is provided in 
Rule 45(1) and 
(3) 
Rule 162(1) and 
(4) 
Rule 64(1) 
Rule 63 
Art. 52(2) 
Art. 53 
Part B – Chapter X-6 

 
the search opinion; see B-VIII, 3.3 for the content of the EESR in 
these cases. 
(iv) 
claims not searched because they do not comply with Rule 43(2) 
(see B-VIII, 4.2). 
9. Documents found in the search 
9.1 Identification of documents in the search report 
9.1.1 Bibliographic data 
All documents cited in the search report must be clearly identified by 
indicating the necessary bibliographic data. All citations in the search report 
normally comply with the recommendations in WIPO Standards ST.14 (for 
including references cited in patent documents), ST.3 (for two-letter codes) 
and ST.16 (for identifying different kinds of patent documents), but there 
can be exceptions where strictly adhering to them would entail a lot of extra 
work and cost and is not necessary to enable a document to be clearly and 
easily identified. 
9.1.2 "Corresponding documents" 
The search division will often come across "corresponding" documents 
(see B-VI, 6.2), i.e. documents which have the same or substantially the 
same technical content. These are usually either patent documents from 
the same patent family or abstracts. 
(i) 
Patent documents in the same patent family 
These are patent documents which are from the same country or 
from different countries and share at least one claimed priority. 
If a cited patent document belongs to a patent family, the search 
division does not cite all the other family members it knows of and 
can understand, as they are anyway mentioned in the annex to the 
search report. However, it may choose to mention one or more 
members in addition to the one cited (see B-IV, 3.1). These 
documents are identified by naming the office they originate from, 
specifying their type and number and placing them after an 
ampersand sign (&). There are various possible reasons why the 
search division may wish to draw attention in the search report to 
more than one document in the same patent family: 
(a) 
One document in the patent family was published before the 
earliest priority date of the application but in a non-EPO 
language, whereas another member of the same patent family 
was published in an EPO language (see Art. 14(1)) but after 
the earliest priority date of the application. 
Example 
A European application claims a priority of 3 September 1999. 
The search on this application uncovers a relevant document 
Rule 62a 
 

Part B – Chapter X-7 
WO 99 12395 A, which was published in Japanese on 
11 March 1999 and so in time to qualify as prior art under 
Art. 54(2). There is also the European family member 
published as an English translation under Art. 153(4) on 
1 March 2000. That is too late for it to be prior art under 
Art. 54(2), but it can be cited in the search report as an "&" 
document of the Japanese-language WO publication and 
made available to the applicant (see B-X, 11.3). It will then be 
used to interpret the content of the Japanese WO publication 
when the application is examined (see G-IV, 4). In the search 
report, these documents would be cited as shown below (on 
the linking of cited documents to the claims they relate to ‒ 
here: claims 1-10 ‒ see B-X, 9.3). 
X 
WO 99 12395 A (SEKI SHUNICHI; KIGUCHI 
HIROSHI (JP); SEIKO EPOSON CORP (JP)) 
11 March 1999 (1999-03-11) 
* figure 1 * 
& EP 0 982 974 (SEIKO EPSON CORP) 
1 March 2000 (2000-03-01) 
* figure 1 * 
* claim 1 * 
1-10 
(b) 
There are several different documents in the same patent 
family and each one contains relevant technical subject-matter 
not found in the other family members. 
(c) 
The application cites a family member drafted in a non-EPO 
language but there is another family member in an EPO 
language, and both were published before the application's 
earliest priority date. 
Example  
Y 
WO9001867 A (WIDEGREN LARS (SE)) 
8 March 1990 (1990-03-08) 
* claim 1 * 
1-10 
D,Y 
& SE461824 B (WIDEGREN LARS (SE)) 
2 April 1990 (1990-04-02) 
1-10 
By citing the relevant SE document, which is a family member 
of the relevant WO document, in the application, the applicant 
has already met the requirement that the state of the art be 
mentioned in the description (Rule 42(1)(b)). It is important to 
make the examining division aware of this by mentioning it in 
the search report (see F-II, 4.3). 
(ii) 
Abstracts (see B-VI, 6.2) 
Abstracts are provided by several database providers (e.g. Chemical 
Abstracts or Derwent) and cover many different types of disclosure 
(e.g. patent documents, journal articles, PhD theses, books). They 
Part B – Chapter X-8 

 
summarise the most important aspects of the original document's 
technical content. Most abstracts cited are in English. Whenever 
citing an abstract in the search report, the search division must 
always enter the original document to which it relates after the 
"&" sign. 
Example  
X 
DATABASE WPI  
Week 200961 
Thomson Scientific, London, GB;  
AN 2009-N01904  
& WO 2009/104990 A1 (VALEXPHARM CO LTD) 
27 August 2009 (2009-08-27) 
* abstract * 
1-5 
There are various reasons why the search division may choose to 
cite the abstract rather than the original document (in which case the 
original document must instead be mentioned as an "&" document). 
For instance, the original document may not be readily available to it 
(e.g. a PhD thesis) or it may be in a non-EPO language (e.g. a 
journal article in Russian) and there is no corresponding document. 
The original document is made available to the applicant only if it has 
been earmarked for this by the search division (see B-X, 12). 
If the search division wants to refer to a published Japanese or 
Korean patent application (with kind code A), it cites the Japanese or 
Korean publication in the search report. If an English abstract is 
available in the EPO databases (Patent Abstracts of Japan or Patent 
Abstracts of Korea), both the Japanese or Korean publication and 
the English abstract are made available to the applicant. A machine 
translation is also made available (see B-X, 9.1.3 and 12, and 
G-IV, 4.1). 
9.1.3 Language of the documents cited 
Members of the same patent family are often published in various different 
languages. The search division therefore has a choice as to the language 
in which it wishes to cite such a document in the search report. If the 
relevant technical content of the various family members is the same and 
they were all published before the earliest priority date of the application, 
they are all equally relevant to the application. The search division chooses 
which one of them to cite by looking at the languages they were published 
in and applying the following order of preference: 
(1) 
an official EPO language (i.e. English, French or German (Art. 14(1)) 
(2) 
an official language of an EPC contracting state under Art. 14(4) 
(see A-VII, 1.1) ‒ the document can usually be read by a colleague if 
the search division member in charge is not familiar with this 
language (see B-VI, 6.2) 
(3) 
a language other than those of the EPC contracting states. 
 

Part B – Chapter X-9 
In cases (2) and (3), the search division might consider citing an abstract in 
an official EPO language instead of the original document. 
If the original document is in a language the search division cannot readily 
understand (e.g. Chinese or Russian), it is best to cite the abstract. It is 
possible to obtain a machine translation of a patent document into an 
official EPO language. This machine translation will be made available to 
the applicant (see B-X, 12 and G-IV, 4). 
Alternatively, if only a specific paragraph of the machine translation is 
needed, the search division may copy that paragraph into the search 
opinion, but the full machine translation will be made available to the 
applicant as well. 
Non-official translations (i.e. translations with no legal value) of publications 
in a language the search division cannot readily understand (e.g. Russian, 
Japanese, Korean or Chinese) will not be cited in the search report. 
9.1.4 Supplementary European search report 
In certain circumstances, it is permissible not to cite any documents at all in 
a supplementary European search report under Art. 153(7) (see B-IV, 2.5). 
The search report will then include the phrase "No further relevant 
documents disclosed", but the search opinion (if applicable ‒ see B-XI, 7) 
will give an opinion on whether the claimed invention seems to be 
patentable over the state of the art cited in the international search report 
(B-XI, 1.1). 
Even if the search division disagrees with the ISA's opinion on the 
relevance of a document cited in the international search report for 
assessing the novelty and/or inventive step of the claimed invention, it 
normally does not cite the document again in the supplementary European 
search report with a new, corrected document category. The exception to 
this is where it wants to combine a first document falling under category Y 
(see B-X, 9.2.1) and not found until its supplementary European search 
with another document already cited in the international search report: it 
may then choose to cite the other document from the international search 
report again in its supplementary European search report as a 
"Y" document in combination with the first document. Where this 
recategorising of the document does not affect all the claims, this is clarified 
in the supplementary European search report in order to ensure 
consistency with the European search opinion. 
9.2 Categories of documents (X, Y, P, A, D, etc.) 
All documents cited in the search report are assigned to one of the 
categories explained in more detail below by placing the relevant letter in 
the first column of the citation sheets. Categories can be combined if 
necessary. 
9.2.1 Particularly relevant documents 
Where a document cited in the search report is particularly relevant, it is 
labelled with the letter "X" or "Y". Category "X" applies where a document 
Art. 52(1) 
Art. 54 
Art. 56 
Part B – Chapter X-10 

 
shows on its own that a claimed invention cannot be considered novel or 
to involve an inventive step. 
Category "Y" applies where a document suggests that a claimed invention 
cannot be considered to involve an inventive step when the document is 
combined with one or more other documents of the same category and this 
combination is obvious to a person skilled in the art. However, if a 
document (called a "primary document") explicitly refers to another 
document as providing more detailed information on certain features 
(see G-IV, 8) and the combination of these documents is considered 
particularly relevant, the primary document is labelled with the letter "X", 
i.e. not "Y", and the document it refers to (the "secondary document") is 
labelled with "X" or "L" as appropriate. 
9.2.2 Documents defining the state of the art and not prejudicing 
novelty or inventive step 
Where a document cited in the search report represents state of the art that 
does not prejudice the novelty or inventive step of the claimed invention, it 
is labelled with the letter "A" (see, however, B-III, 1.1). 
9.2.3 Documents which refer to a non-written disclosure 
Where a document cited in the search report refers to a non-written 
disclosure (e.g. conference proceedings), it is labelled with the letter "O'' 
(see B-VI, 2). For oral disclosures that took place at an officially recognised 
exhibition (Art. 55(1)(b)), see B-VI, 5.5. The document category "O" is 
always accompanied by one of the letters explained in B-X, 9.2.1 and 9.2.2 
to indicate its level of relevance. So e.g. "O, X", "O, Y" or "O, A". 
9.2.4 Intermediate documents 
Documents published between the priority date claimed in the searched 
application ‒ or the earliest priority date if there is more than one 
(see B-VI, 5.2 and B-XI, 4) ‒ and its filing date are labelled with the letter 
"P". The letter "P" is also used for a document published on the very day of 
the earliest priority date claimed. The document category "P" is always 
accompanied by one of the letters explained in B-X, 9.2.1 and 9.2.2 to 
indicate its level of relevance. So e.g. "P, X", "P, Y" or "P, A". 
9.2.5 Documents relating to the theory or principle behind the 
invention 
Where a document cited in the search report may be useful for a better 
understanding of the principle or theory behind the invention or shows that 
the reasoning or the facts behind it are incorrect, it is labelled with the 
letter "T". 
In the latter case, the "T" document is evidence within the meaning of 
Art. 117(1)(c) rather than prior art within the meaning of Art. 54(2) and so it 
does not matter whether it was published before or after the searched 
application's priority or filing date. 
For example: an applicant claims a group of chemical compounds and the 
description gives a generically defined process for their production. The 
search division finds a document published after the priority date which 
Art. 52(1) 
Art. 56 
Rule 61(4) 
Rule 61(3) 
 

Part B – Chapter X-11 
clearly shows that the generically defined process cannot produce all of the 
compounds covered by the claims. It can then cite it as a "T" document and 
use it to raise an Art. 84 objection that the claims are not supported by the 
description (see F-IV, 6.3). 
9.2.6 Potentially conflicting patent documents 
Any patent document which has a filing or priority date before the searched 
application's filing date (not its priority date – see B-VI, 3 and B-XI, 4) but 
was published on or after that date and whose content could potentially 
constitute prior art relevant to novelty (Art. 54(1)) is labelled with the letter 
"E". This label is also assigned where the patent document and the 
searched application have the same filing date (see G-IV, 5.4). However, 
patent documents claiming the same priority as the searched application do 
not fall in this category and are not cited. 
9.2.7 Documents cited in the application 
When the search report cites documents already mentioned in the 
searched application's description, these are labelled with the letter "D" 
(see B-IV, 1.3). 
9.2.8 Documents cited for other reasons 
Where the search report cites a document for reasons other than those 
referred to above (in particular as evidence – see B-VI, 5.6), for example 
because it: 
(a) 
casts doubt on a priority claim (see B-VI, 5.3) 
(b) 
establishes the publication date of another citation (see B-VI, 5.6) 
(c) 
is relevant to the issue of double patenting (see B-IV, 2.3(v) and 
G-IV, 5.4), 
it is labelled with the letter "L" and brief reasons for citing it are given. In the 
special case that the search division considers the claimed subject-matter 
to be notorious and so no documentary evidence is needed (see 
B-VIII, 2.2), it will give the reasoning behind not citing any prior-art 
documents in the search opinion. 
A citation of an "L" document does not need not be linked to any of the 
claims (see B-X, 9.3) unless the evidence it provides relates only to 
particular claims (e.g. it shows the priority claim is invalid for only some 
claims), in which case the claims affected must be specified. 
9.3 Relationship between documents and claims 
Each document cited in the search report is accompanied by an indication 
of the claims to which it relates, unless it falls in category "L" 
(see B-X, 9.2.8). The same document can be cited in different categories 
for different claims, but the specific claims it relates to in each category 
must be indicated. 
Art. 54(3) 
Art. 139(2) 
Rule 42(1)(b) 
Art. 117(1)(c) 
Rule 61(2) 
Part B – Chapter X-12 

 
Example  
X 
WO9001867 A (WIDEGREN LARS (SE))  
8 March 1990 (1990-03-08) 
1 
Y 
* column 3, line 27 – line 43; figure 1 * 
2-5 
A 
* figure 2 * 
6-10 
The document cited in the above example discloses subject-matter which 
prejudices the novelty or inventive step of the subject-matter of claim 1 and, 
when the document is combined with another one cited in the search 
report, the inventive step of the subject-matter of claims 2 to 5 and which 
also represents non-prejudicial state of the art for the subject-matter of 
claims 6 to 10. The passages or figures are not necessarily relevant to the 
claims and the category indicated on the same line. 
Generally speaking, all claims are mentioned in the search report at least 
once in relation to at least one document published before the earliest 
priority date (unless a particular claim was not searched because the 
search was restricted as described in B-X, 8) (see B-IV, 2.5). 
9.4 Identification of relevant passages in prior-art documents 
If a cited document is very long, the search division will identify the specific 
parts (e.g. claim, example, figure, table, text passage on a particular page, 
or a specific time or time range in a video and/or audio media fragment) 
which contain the technical subject-matter closest to (or coinciding with) the 
searched invention. This is particularly important where the document is 
relied on to support objections to novelty or inventive step. 
Where the search division relies on a translation of a prior-art document, it 
will indicate the relevant passages in the original document whenever 
possible. 
It makes sense to cite not only those parts of the document describing the 
same or similar technical subject-matter but also those parts or passages 
relating to the problem solved by that subject-matter. This makes it easier 
to assess inventive step in examination and also gives the applicant a 
better idea of how the document may be used during the proceedings. 
10. Authentication and dates 
The search report shows the date on which it was drawn up, i.e. the date it 
was drafted by the search division member who carried out the search. 
The member's name must also appear on the search report. 
11. Copies to be made available with the search report 
11.1 General remarks 
The search report is sent to the applicant and transmitted to the examining 
division. Copies of all the cited documents are made available to the 
applicant (see also B-IV, 3.3), except for those documents appearing in the 
Rule 61(2) 
Rule 65 
 

Part B – Chapter X-13 
search report after the "&" symbol which the search division has not 
earmarked for this (see B-X, 11.3). 
These cited documents are then used to assess the patentability of the 
claimed invention (see B-XI, 3) both in the search opinion (if applicable ‒ 
see B-XI, 7) and in the examination proceedings. 
11.2 Electronic version of cited document 
In the case of patent documents, a complete copy is made available. 
If a document has been published in electronic form only (see Rule 68(2) 
and OJ EPO 2000, 367), an electronic version is made available to the 
applicant. If only parts of it are not available in paper form, then at least 
those parts will be made available as an electronic version. At any rate, the 
applicant must ultimately be provided with the whole document either as a 
combination of paper and electronic versions or in electronic form only. 
11.3 Patent family members; the "&" sign 
In the case of patent families, only a copy of the family member actually 
cited is normally made available. The other members are mentioned in an 
automatically 
generated 
annex 
produced 
for 
information 
only 
(see B-X, 9.1.2). However, in certain circumstances one or more other 
patent documents in the same patent family may be mentioned on the 
search report after the "&" sign (see B-X, 9.1.2(i)). The search division may 
decide that copies of these patent documents should also be made 
available to the applicant (they will then be included in the examination file 
too, and can be referred to in any search opinion). 
11.4 Reviews or books 
In the case of a review or a book, copies of the relevant pages are made 
available to the applicant. The relevant bibliographic information has to be 
clear from the these copies. 
11.5 Summaries, extracts or abstracts 
Where a document cited is a summary, extract or abstract of another, 
separately published document, a copy of the summary, extract or abstract 
is made available to the applicant. 
If, however, the search division considers that the whole source document 
is needed, that document must be cited and a copy must be made available 
to the applicant (see B-X, 9.1.2(ii)). 
When an online search in a database (e.g. CAS References, CAS Registry, 
COMPENDEX, INSPEC, NTIS) is performed and the original document 
referred to in the database is not available at the EPO when the search 
report is drafted, the extract is added to the file instead of the original. 
11.6 Citation of video and/or audio media fragments available on the 
internet 
Video and/or audio media fragments available on the internet are converted 
into a non-patent literature citation. The bibliographic data include the URL 
of the original location on the internet. 
Part B – Chapter X-14 

 
If these citations cease to be available on the internet, a copy will be made 
available to the applicant on request (see G-IV, 7.5.6). 
12. Transmittal of the search report and search opinion 
The EPO forwards the search report and the search opinion (if applicable ‒ 
see B-XI, 7) to the applicant and makes copies of all cited documents 
available to them (see B-X, 11.1), including any machine translations 
(see B-X, 9.1.3) and any documents appearing after the "&" sign that the 
search division has earmarked for this (see B-X, 11.3). 
Rule 65 
Rule 61(1) 
 

Part B – Chapter XI-1 
Chapter XI – The search opinion 
1. Search opinion is part of the EESR 
The extended European search report (EESR) is made up of two items: 
(i) 
the European search report or the supplementary European search 
report (see B-X) 
(ii) 
the search opinion. 
1.1 The search opinion 
For European patent applications filed as of 1 July 2005 and international 
applications filed as of that date that enter the European phase, European 
search reports and supplementary European search reports will be 
accompanied by an opinion on whether the application and the invention 
dealt with seem to meet the EPC requirements. 
This does not apply in the cases referred to in B-XI, 7. 
The findings in the search opinion must be in line with the document 
categories assigned in the search report and with any other issues raised 
there, such as lack of unity of invention or any limitation of the search. 
1.2 Position of the examining division 
The examining division will consider any objections raised in the search 
opinion and the applicant's response to them (see B-XI, 8) when examining 
the application. It may change the position taken in the search opinion after 
receiving arguments, amendments and other submissions from the 
applicant in response to the search opinion or subsequently in examination 
proceedings. Irrespective of any such submissions, it may also alter the 
position if it finds Art. 54(3) state of the art when carrying out a top-up 
search or if it is made aware of additional state of the art either by the 
applicant or in observations filed by third parties under Art. 115 (see also 
B-IV, 3.2, C-IV, 7.3 and 7.4). 
The examining division can also reverse the findings in the search opinion 
for other reasons (see B-III, 1.1), but this is rare. 
2. Basis for the search opinion 
Where a European patent application is not based on an international 
application, the applicant cannot amend it before receiving the search 
report. This means that the search opinion will always deal with the 
application documents as originally filed although it will also take account of 
any reply from the applicant to an invitation under Rule 63(1) 
(see B-VIII, 3.4). 
However, if it is based on an international application and undergoes a 
supplementary European search under Art. 153(7) (see B-II, 4.3), the 
applicant will have had an opportunity to amend it both in the international 
phase and on entry into the European phase. The search opinion will then 
be based on the application documents which the applicant has most 
recently asked to be processed (this may involve cancelling previously filed 
Rule 62(1) 
Art. 123(1) 
Rule 137(1) 
Rule 161(2) 
Rule 159(1)(b) 
Art. 19 PCT 
Art. 34(2)(b) PCT 
Part B – Chapter XI-2 

 
amendments and reverting to parts or all of an earlier set of application 
documents). The supplementary European search report will also relate to 
these application documents (see B-II, 4.3 and B-III, 3.3.2). 
Where the search opinion and supplementary European search report deal 
with amended application documents but the requirements in Rule 137(4) 
have not been met (see H-III, 2.1), a communication asking the applicant to 
meet these requirements (see B-VIII, 6 and H-III, 2.1.1) cannot be sent yet 
(i.e. before the search opinion is drawn up) because the examining division 
is still not responsible for the application (see C-II, 1). Once it does take 
charge of the application, it can send this communication, but only if the 
amendments in question have not since been withdrawn or superseded 
(see H-III, 2.1.1) and only if the application is of one of the types listed 
in H-III, 2.1.4. 
2.1 Application documents filed under Rule 56 EPC, Rule 56a EPC, 
Rule 20.5 PCT or Rule 20.5bis PCT 
If the Receiving Section decided not to redate the application under 
Rule 56(2) or (5) or under Rule 56a(3) or (6), but the search division 
considers that the subsequently filed missing parts or correct application 
documents or parts are not "completely contained" in the priority document 
and/or the requirements of Rule 56(3) or Rule 56a(4) are not met, its 
search will also take into account prior art which would potentially become 
relevant for assessing novelty and inventive step of the subject-matter 
claimed if the application were redated under Rule 56(2) or (5) or under 
Rule 56a(3) or (6). The search opinion must include a warning that the 
application seems not to meet the requirements in Rule 56 or Rule 56a for 
keeping the accorded filing date, a statement of reasons as to why this is 
the case and an indication that a formal decision on whether to redate the 
application will be taken by the examining division at a later stage. If 
appropriate, the search opinion can also comment on the effect redating 
would have on the priority claim and/or the status of the prior-art documents 
cited in the search report. 
A similar procedure is followed for a Euro-PCT application. If the search 
division finds when carrying out a supplementary European search that the 
subsequently filed missing parts under 
Rule 20.5(d) PCT or, for 
international applications filed on or after 1 November 2022, correct 
application documents or parts under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT are not 
"completely contained" in the priority document, even though the receiving 
Office did not redate the application, the search opinion must include a 
warning that the application does not seem to meet the requirements of 
Rule 20.6 PCT (Rule 82ter.1(c) PCT), a statement of reasons as to why this 
is the case and an indication that a formal decision on whether to redate 
the application will be taken by the examining division at a later stage. 
Conversely, if the application has been redated by the Receiving Section or 
the receiving Office, but the search division has reason to believe that it 
does 
meet 
the 
requirements 
of 
Rule 56(3) 
or 
Rule 56a(4) 
(or 
Rule 20.6 PCT), it must indicate in the search opinion that the examining 
division may reconsider the decisions of the Receiving Section (or the 
 

Part B – Chapter XI-3 
receiving Office) at a later stage unless it is bound by a decision of the 
board of appeal. 
2.2 Applications containing claims filed after the accorded filing date 
If the application documents contain any claims filed after the accorded 
filing date (Rules 40(1), 57(c) and 58), the search division has to examine 
whether those claims meet the requirements of Art. 123(2), i.e. do not go 
beyond the technical content of the application documents as they were at 
the filing date. If it finds that they do not meet the requirements, it will carry 
out the search as described in B-VIII, 6. 
Where the search opinion and search report are based on late-filed claims 
but the requirements in Rule 137(4) have not been met (see H-III, 2.1), a 
communication asking the applicant to meet these requirements 
(see H-III, 2.1.1) cannot be sent yet (i.e. before the search opinion is drawn 
up) because the examining division is still not responsible for the 
application (see C-II, 1). Once it does take charge of the application, it can 
send this communication, but only if the late-filed claims have not since 
been superseded (see H-III, 2.1.1) and only if the application is of one of 
the types listed in H-III, 2.1.4. 
3. Analysis of the application and content of the search opinion 
If the search division takes the view that the application and/or the invention 
do not meet the EPC requirements, then it will raise objections in the 
search opinion. 
As a general rule, the search opinion covers all objections to the application 
(but see B-XI, 3.4). These objections can relate to substantive matters 
(e.g. the subject-matter is not patentable) or to procedural matters (e.g. one 
or more of the requirements in Rules 41 to 43, and 48 to 50 are not met; 
see Arts. 1 and 2 of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113), or even to both. 
Where claims relating to a method of treatment of the human or animal 
body or methods of diagnosis practised on the human or animal body have 
been searched because it can already be envisaged at this stage that they 
will be reworded in an allowable format (see B-VIII, 2), the search opinion 
will nonetheless object to these claims as relating to subject-matter that is 
not patentable. 
3.1 The search division's dossier 
The search division's first step is to study the description, any drawings and 
the claims. For this, it will have access to the documents making up the 
European application and a complete history of the proceedings up to the 
start of search although the priority documents and any translations may 
not yet be available at this stage (see B-XI, 4). 
3.2 Reasoning 
3.2.1 Reasoned objections 
For each objection, the search opinion must clearly specify which part of 
the application is deficient and which EPC requirement is not met, for 
Art. 53(c) 
Rule 62 
Part B – Chapter XI-4 

 
instance by referring to specific articles or rules. It must also give the 
reason for the objection where this is not immediately apparent. For 
example, where a prior-art document is cited but only part of it is relevant, 
the specific passage relied on should be specified. If the cited prior art 
shows a lack of novelty or inventive step in the independent claim or claims 
and there is lack of unity between dependent claims as a result 
(see F-V, 7), the applicant is informed of this situation (see H-IV, 5.2(i)). 
Substantive matters are normally set out first. The search opinion should be 
drafted in a way that facilitates later examination of the amended 
application and, in particular, prevents the need to read it all again in depth 
(see C-IV, 2). 
In general, all claims are referred to, and all documents cited as "X" or "Y" 
against certain claims are referred to in the search opinion with a related 
objection. For dependent claims, it may not always be necessary to give 
detailed reasoning in the search opinion, but it at least needs to be 
apparent what the reason for the objection is. 
3.2.2 Positive statements 
Where applicable, the search division also comments positively on 
patentability in the search opinion. The amount of detail given should be 
enough to help applicants make their decisions. There is therefore no need 
to give such detailed reasoning as for an objection, but simply making a 
positive statement without explaining it will only be enough if the reason 
behind is anyway immediately apparent. 
3.3 Comments and amendments in response to the search opinion 
The applicant generally has to respond to the search opinion although there 
are some exceptions (see B-XI, 8). 
3.4 Scope of first analysis for generally deficient applications 
Where an application is found to be generally deficient, the search division 
does not analyse it in detail, but sends the applicant a search opinion 
informing them of its view, mentioning the major deficiencies and saying 
that, when the application moves on to the examination stage, further 
examination will be deferred until the application has been amended to 
overcome them. There are cases where, although a meaningful analysis is 
possible, a fundamental objection arises, e.g. it is clear that certain claims 
lack novelty and that the statement of claim will have to be drastically 
recast, or there are substantial amendments (to an international application 
entering the European phase – see B-XI, 2) which are not allowable either 
because they add new subject-matter that was not in the application as 
filed (Art. 123(2)) or because they introduce other deficiencies (e.g. the 
amendment makes the claims unclear – Art. 84). It may then be more 
appropriate to deal with this objection before making a detailed analysis. 
For instance, if the claims need to be recast, it may not make sense to 
object to the clarity of some dependent claims or to a passage in the 
description which may anyway have to be amended or even deleted in 
examination proceedings as a result. However, if there are other major 
objections, these should be addressed. Generally speaking, the search 
division should try to deal with as many deficiencies as possible in the 
search opinion to help make the decision-making process in the later 
 

Part B – Chapter XI-5 
examination proceedings as efficient as possible. As regards positive 
statements on patentability in the search opinion, see B-XI, 3.2.2. 
3.5 Contribution to the known art 
When analysing the application, the search division concentrates on trying 
to understand what technical contribution the invention defined in the 
claims makes to the known art. This should normally be sufficiently clear 
from the application as filed. If it is not, the search division will raise an 
objection in the search opinion (see F-II, 4.5), but only if it is convinced it is 
necessary, because it might lead the applicant to add subject-matter in 
breach of Art. 123(2) (see H-IV, 2 and H-V). 
3.6 EPC requirements 
Although the search division must bear all the EPC requirements in mind, 
the ones it is most likely to have to deal with are: sufficiency of disclosure 
(see F-III); clarity and support in the description, especially for the 
independent claims (see F-IV, 4 and 6); novelty (see G-VI); and inventive 
step (see G-VII). 
3.7 Search division's approach 
The search division does not require or suggest amendments simply 
because it thinks they would improve the wording of the description or 
claims. It should not take a pedantic approach; what is important is that the 
meaning of the description and claims is clear. However, any serious 
inconsistencies between the claims and the description as filed are 
objected to (see F-IV, 4.3). 
3.8 Making suggestions 
It is not for the search division to tell applicants to amend their application in 
a particular way to overcome an objection. It is the applicants' own 
responsibility to draft their application and they are free to amend it any way 
they choose as long as the amendment removes the deficiency and is 
otherwise in keeping with the EPC. However, it can sometimes help if the 
search division suggests, at least in general terms, an acceptable form of 
amendment, but it then has to make it clear that the suggestion is merely to 
help the applicant and that other forms of amendment will still be 
considered in the examination proceedings. Although not obliged to do so, 
it will point out amendments which would overcome the objections raised to 
the applicant if there is a clear way out. 
When suggesting an acceptable way of amending the claims, the search 
division will also invite the applicant to adapt the description to bring it into 
line with the amended claims (see F-IV, 4.3). 
However, the applicant remains responsible for deciding how to word the 
application and in particular for defining the subject-matter for which 
protection is sought (Art. 113(2) EPC). 
3.9 Positive opinion 
After analysing the application as described in B-XI, 3.1 to 3.8, the search 
division may conclude that it and the claimed invention both satisfy the EPC 
requirements and it will then express a general positive opinion on the 
Rule 42(1)(c) 
Part B – Chapter XI-6 

 
application documents in the search opinion. However, if a full search for all 
potentially conflicting applications under Art. 54(3) could not be carried out 
at this stage (see B-VI, 4.1), a top-up search will be needed at the 
examination stage (see C-IV, 7.1) and so the application remains open to 
any objections under Art. 54(3) raised then. 
A positive search opinion can be issued even where minor amendments 
would have to be made to the application documents for the application to 
be granted. So long as no prior art within the meaning of Art. 54(3) is found 
in any subsequent top-up search, the examining division can issue the 
Rule 71(3) communication and propose these minor amendments there 
(see C-V, 1.1). 
The applicant does not have to respond to a positive search opinion 
(see B-XI, 8). 
It is not possible at the search stage to officially designate an examining 
division, because the Receiving Section is still responsible for the 
application (Art. 16). However, the prospective members of the examining 
division will already be known and the search division will consult them to 
check that they agree to the issue of a positive search opinion. 
4. Priority claim and the search opinion 
When it is not possible to check the validity of the priority claim at the 
search stage, because: 
(i) 
the search is carried out before the date by when the priority 
document has to be supplied (up to 16 months from the earliest 
claimed priority – Rule 53(1)) 
(ii) 
a translation of the priority document is required but not available to 
the search division when drafting the search opinion (Rule 53(3), 
see A-III, 6.8 and its subsections, and F-VI, 3.4), 
the priority claim will usually be assumed to be valid for the purposes of the 
search opinion. Where the only objections which could be raised against 
the application at this stage depend on the priority being invalid, and the 
priority document (or its translation) is not available, the search division will 
issue an entirely positive search opinion without any objections. In case (ii) 
above, a communication under Rule 53(3) may be issued (see A-III, 6.8.1) 
and the priority's validity may later be reviewed in examination proceedings. 
However, if a priority claim's validity has to be assessed as a result of 
intermediate prior art or potential state of the art under Art. 54(3), and 
evidence against its validity is already available, then this needs to be 
brought up in the search opinion. For example, where the priority document 
is available when the search opinion is drafted and the technical features of 
the claims are not in the priority document, the search division may be able 
to do this even without a required translation if it is familiar with the 
language of the priority document (see also B-VI, 5.3). 
 

Part B – Chapter XI-7 
4.1 Use of "P" and "E" documents in the search opinion 
Where the search division refers to a document potentially amounting to 
prior art under Art. 54(3) in the search opinion, there are two possibilities, 
depending on whether or not it can conclusively establish that the prior-art 
document has an earlier relevant date than the application: if so, it will raise 
a novelty objection under Art. 54(3); if not, it will assume that any priority 
which cannot be checked is valid. This leads to two different scenarios: 
(i) 
The prior-art document belongs to the state of the art under 
Art. 54(3). The search division therefore raises a novelty objection in 
the search opinion and specifies which priorities have been assumed 
to be valid. 
(ii) 
The prior-art document does not belong to the state of the art under 
Art. 54(3). If the search opinion raises other kinds of objection in the 
search opinion, it will refer to the document potentially falling under 
Art. 54(3) (and its relevant passages) and will explain which priorities 
have been assumed valid. 
Where "P" documents are also cited in the search report and they are not 
potential prior art under Art. 54(3) (because they are not international or 
European patent applications), they may be prior art under Art. 54(2) and 
so be relevant for the assessment of novelty and inventive step in so far as 
the application's priority is invalid. If its priority can be checked, the search 
division will do so. If it finds that the priority is not valid, it will raise 
objections in the search opinion on the basis of the "P" documents. If the 
priority cannot be checked, it will assume it is valid and will not raise any 
objection in the search opinion. 
The issue of whether the priority claim or claims are valid then needs to be 
reviewed in examination (see F-VI, 2). 
5. Unity in relation to the search opinion 
Where the search division finds that the claimed invention lacks unity 
(Art. 82 and Rule 44(1) and (2)), it will send the applicant an invitation to 
pay further search fees and a partial search report on the invention or 
unitary group of inventions first mentioned in the claims (see B-VII, 1.1, 1.2 
and 1.3 and Rule 64(1)). It will also send a provisional opinion on the 
patentability of that invention or unitary group of inventions and the reasons 
for its non-unity findings (see B-VII, 1.2). 
After the time limit for paying the further search fees has expired, 
(Rule 64(1)) the applicant will be sent a search report on the invention or 
unitary group of inventions first mentioned in the claims and all other 
claimed inventions or unitary groups of inventions for which further search 
fees were paid. This search report will be accompanied by a search opinion 
setting out: 
(i) 
the reasoning behind the finding of a lack of unity 
(ii) 
an opinion on whether the first invention or unitary group of 
inventions mentioned in the claims is patentable 
Part B – Chapter XI-8 

 
(iii) 
an opinion on whether all inventions or unitary groups of inventions 
for which further search fees have been paid are patentable. 
For supplementary European search reports on Euro-PCT applications 
lacking unity of invention, the same procedure is followed (Rule 164(1) –
 see B-VII, 2.3). 
6. The search opinion where the search was limited 
Any arguments and objections set out in the search opinion must be 
consistent with how and why the search was limited. This applies to 
limitations for reasons of non-patentability (e.g. business methods – 
Art. 52(2)(c), see B-VIII, 1), for reasons of severe deficiencies preventing a 
meaningful search (Rule 63, see B-VIII, 3) or due to a contravention of 
Rule 43(2) (Rule 62a, see B-VIII, 4). In these cases, the search opinion will 
also contain the information mentioned in B-VIII, 3.3 and 4.3. 
Where claims were not searched because the applicant had not paid the 
claims fees for them and so they were deemed abandoned (Rule 45 or 
Rule 162), this will be pointed out to the applicant in the search opinion. 
7. No search opinion is issued 
Where an applicant has filed a request for examination under Rule 70(1) 
before being sent the search report and has waived the right to a 
communication under Rule 70(2) (see C-II, 1(ii)), the examining division 
becomes responsible for the application as soon as the search report is 
sent (Art. 18(1) and Rule 10(2)). 
If the application is deficient, the examining division will issue a 
communication under Art. 94(3) in place of the search opinion. If the 
applicant does not respond to this communication, the application will be 
considered withdrawn under Art. 94(4) (see C-III, 4.2). 
If the application is ready for grant, the procedure is as follows: 
(i) 
Where the search for conflicting applications under Art. 54(3) was 
complete, the examining division will issue a communication under 
Rule 71(3). 
(ii) 
Where the search for conflicting applications under Art. 54(3) was not 
complete, the applicant will be informed that the application can be 
granted so long as no state of the art under Art. 54(3) is found during 
the top-up search (see B-XI, 3.9). This is purely for information and 
the applicant does not have to respond. 
8. Response to the extended European search report (EESR) 
Applicants have to respond to the search opinion within the time limit for 
filing the request for examination under Rule 70(1) (see C-II, 1 and 
A-VI, 2.1). 
However, where applicants filed a request for examination (which under 
Art. 94(1) means also paying the examination fee) before the search report 
and the search opinion were transmitted to them, they are sent a 
Rule 70a(1) 
Rule 70a(2) 
 

Part B – Chapter XI-9 
communication under Rule 70(2) asking them to confirm that they wish to 
continue with the application and setting a period for this (see C-II, 1(i)). 
They then also have to respond to the search opinion within that period. 
This is generally what happens for Euro-PCT applications for which a 
supplementary European search report and search opinion have to be 
drawn up (see B-II, 4.3 and E-IX, 2.5.3), unless the applicant has waived 
the right to a communication under Rule 70(2) (see C-II, 1(ii)), in which 
case the procedure under B-XI, 7 applies. 
If applicants do not respond to the search opinion in time, their application 
will be deemed to be withdrawn and they will be notified of this loss of rights 
accordingly. They can then request further processing in accordance with 
Art. 121 and Rule 135. 
Applicants are not required to respond to the European or supplementary 
European search report where it was drawn up before 1 April 2010, where 
it is not accompanied by a search opinion (see B-XI, 1.1 for applications for 
which a search opinion is drawn up) or where the search opinion was 
positive (see B-XI, 3.9). However, they may still respond to it under 
Rule 137(2) if they so wish, in which case they are encouraged to do so 
before the application moves on to the examination stage (see C-II, 1). 
Applicants can respond to the search opinion by filing amended application 
documents under Rule 137(2) (see C-II, 3.1) (where amended claims are 
filed before publication, see A-VI, 1.3, paragraph 3) or by filing observations 
on the objections raised, or even by filing both. Such amendments and 
observations will only be examined by the examining division if the 
application moves on to the examination stage. 
Making a procedural request, e.g. for a consultation or for oral proceedings, 
or simply disagreeing with the search opinion is not a valid response if done 
without commenting on any of the objections raised. Where such a request 
or simple disagreement is the only response received by expiry of the set 
time limit, the application deemed to be withdrawn under Rule 70a(3). The 
same applies where a request is filed that cannot be granted at this stage 
(e.g. for a decision according to the state of the file). 
If an applicant does not respond to a search opinion issued for an 
application for which the search report was drawn up before 1 April 2010 
and the application moves on to the examination stage (see C-II, 1 and 
1.1), the examining division will issue a communication referring to the 
search opinion and setting a time limit for a response as the first 
communication under Art. 94(3) (see C-III, 4). If the applicant does not 
respond to this communication in time, the application will be deemed to be 
withdrawn under Art. 94(4). 
Where an applicant files amendments in response to the search opinion but 
not in the way required under Rule 137(4) (see H-III, 2.1), the examining 
division may issue a communication under Rule 137(4) (see H-III, 2.1.1) 
relating to these amendments, but this can only happen after the examining 
division has become responsible for the application (see C-II, 1) and only if 
the application is one of the types listed in H-III, 2.1.4. 
Rule 70a(3) 
Rule 112(1) 
Part B – Chapter XI-10 

 
9. Art. 124 and the utilisation scheme 
When drafting the search opinion, the search division will consider any 
prior-art document provided by the applicant under Rule 141(1) or by the 
office 
of 
first 
filing 
under 
Rule 141(2) 
(see OJ EPO 2011, 62, 
OJ EPO 2012, 540, 
OJ EPO 2013, 216, 
OJ EPO 2015, A2, 
OJ EPO 2016, A18, 
OJ EPO 2019, A55, 
OJ EPO 2021, A38, 
and 
OJ EPO 2021, A39) if it is already available at the time (see A-III, 6.12 and 
B-IV, 1.3). Requests for information on prior art under Rule 141(3) cannot 
be made until the application has entered the examination phase 
(see C-III, 5).  
Art. 124 
Rule 141 
 

Part C – Chapter I-1 
Chapter I – Introduction 
1. General remark 
Chapters C-II to IX set out the general procedure for examination and 
provide guidance on specific matters, where necessary. They do not 
include detailed instructions on matters of internal administration. 
2. The work of examiners 
Completing examination files already started is prioritised over beginning 
work on new files, and grants are expedited once a positive search opinion 
has been issued. 
The attitude of the examiner is very important. Examiners should always 
strive to be constructive and helpful. They should bear in mind that, subject 
to the requirements of the EPC, the drafting of the description and claims of 
a European patent application is the responsibility of the applicant or their 
authorised representative. 
Examiners should note in particular the instruction in section 4 of the 
General Part of the Guidelines. This applies not only in relation to other 
EPO departments. It also means, for example, that the other members of 
an examining division should not attempt to repeat the work of the first 
member (see C-VIII, 4). 
3. Overview 
Part C of the Guidelines deals with matters of examination procedure 
(see C-II to IX). 
Matters of substantive law, i.e. the requirements that a European patent 
application must fulfil, are dealt with in Parts F, G and H. 
4. Purpose of examination 
The purpose of preparing the search opinion (see B-XI) and of the 
subsequent examination proceedings is to ensure that the application and 
the invention to which it relates meet the requirements set out in the 
relevant articles of the EPC and the rules of its Implementing Regulations. 
The prime task of the examining division is to deal with the substantive 
requirements; the criteria by which an examiner judges whether they have 
been met are dealt with in detail, in so far as appears necessary, in Parts F, 
G and H. As for the formal requirements (see Part A), these are initially the 
responsibility of the Receiving Section. 
The examination is to be carried out in accordance with Art. 94(3) and (4), 
Art. 97, Rule 71(1) to 71(7), Rule 71a(1) to 71a(6) and Rule 72. The 
examiner's first step is to study the description, drawings (if any) and the 
claims of the application. However, as they will normally have already done 
this when they carried out the search (see B-XI, 3), they should concentrate 
on any amendments and/or comments filed by the applicant in response to 
the search opinion (see B-XI, 8). Where the applicant has made 
amendments without identifying them and/or their basis in the application 
as filed (see H-III, 2.1) and the application is one of those mentioned in 
Art. 18 
Art. 94(1) 
Art. 164(1) 
Rule 62(1) 
Rule 70(2) 
Part C – Chapter I-2 

 
H-III, 2.1.4, the examining division may send the applicant a communication 
under Rule 137(4) requesting this information (see H-III, 2.1.1). 
 

Part C – Chapter II-1 
Chapter II – Formal requirements to be met 
before the division starts substantive 
examination 
1. Request for examination 
For examination of a European patent application to begin, the applicant 
must file a request for examination and pay the examination fee. The 
request for examination, which is not deemed filed until after the 
examination fee's payment, may be filed in the period between the 
application's filing date and the last day of the six months after the date on 
which the European Patent Bulletin mentions the European search report's 
publication (see A-VI, 2.1). If the request for examination is not filed within 
this period, the application is deemed withdrawn. However, in such a case, 
the applicant can file a request for further processing pursuant to Art. 121. 
The amount of the further processing fee to be paid depends on how many 
and which of the actions required for a valid request for examination have 
been omitted (see E-VIII, 2). According to Rule 70(1), the request for 
examination may not be withdrawn. 
Subject to certain exceptions, the applicant must also respond to the 
search opinion within the above period for filing the request for examination 
(see B-XI, 9 and C-II, 3.1) unless the EPO invites them to confirm an early 
request for examination according to Rule 70(2), in which case they must 
respond to the search opinion within the period provided for under 
Rule 70(2) (see C-II, 1.1). 
Responsibility for examining the application passes from the Receiving 
Section to the examining division when a request for examination is filed. 
This is subject to two exceptions: 
(i) 
if the applicant files a request for examination before the European 
search report is sent to them, then the examining division is 
responsible only from the time when the EPO receives the 
applicant's response to the invitation to confirm under Rule 70(2) 
(ii) 
if the applicant, having waived the right to receive an invitation to 
confirm under Rule 70(2) (see C-VI, 3), files a request for 
examination before the European search report is sent to them, then 
the examining division is responsible only from the time when the 
search report is sent to the applicant. 
1.1 Confirmation of the intention to proceed further with the 
application 
If the applicant files a request for examination before the search report is 
sent to them, the EPO will invite them to confirm, within a six-month period, 
that they wish to proceed with their application. This six-month period is 
calculated from the mention of the European search report's publication in 
the European Patent Bulletin. Where the applicant also has to respond to 
the search opinion, their response is required within this same period 
(see B-XI, 8 and C-II, 3.1). In such a case, the applicant's response to the 
search opinion is interpreted as the confirmation required by Rule 70(2), 
Art. 94 
Art. 121 
Rule 70 
Art. 122(4) 
Rule 136(3) 
Rule 70a(1) and (3) 
Rule 10 
Rule 70(2) 
Rule 70(2) and (3) 
Art. 121 
Art. 11 RFees 
Rule 70a(2) and (3) 
Part C – Chapter II-2 

 
even where not explicitly expressed as such. If they fail to confirm their 
wish to proceed with the application in due time in reply to this invitation, 
the application will be deemed withdrawn. In this case, however, the means 
of redress provided for in Art. 121 (further processing of the application) will 
apply (see A-VI, 2.3 and E-VIII, 2). For the conditions applicable to a refund 
of the examination fee if the application is withdrawn, refused or deemed 
withdrawn, see A-VI, 2.5. 
1.2 Euro-PCT applications 
For applications filed via the PCT route (Euro-PCT application), the 
six-month period under Rule 70(1) begins with the publication of the PCT 
search report or the declaration under Art. 17(2)(a) PCT. However, as is 
laid down in Art. 150(2), the time limit for requesting examination of a 
Euro-PCT application does not expire before the time prescribed in 
Art. 22 PCT and Art. 39 PCT (i.e. not before the time limit of Rule 159(1)(f)). 
The time limit will not be affected by whether a supplementary European 
search pursuant to Art. 153(7) needs to be made or whether the 
international application is again published by the EPO pursuant to 
Art. 153(4). 
If the request for examination of a Euro-PCT application has not been filed 
within the time limit, the application is deemed withdrawn under 
Rule 160(1). In such a case, however, the applicant can file a request for 
further processing pursuant to Art. 121 (see E-VIII, 2). 
Where the Euro-PCT application is subject to the preparation of a 
supplementary European search report (see B-II, 4.3), once this report has 
been dispatched, a communication under Rule 70(2) is sent to the applicant 
inviting them to confirm the request for examination within six months of 
that communication's notification (see E-IX, 2.5.3). 
1.3 Invention to be examined 
Where the search report and the search opinion have been drawn up to 
cover several inventions lacking unity, the applicant is free to select the 
invention to be examined in the application under consideration (see 
also C-III, 3.2). 
The others will be subject to objections of lack of unity and may be divided 
out according to Rule 36 (see C-III, 3.3 and C-IX, 1.3). 
2. 
Allocation of the application 
Dossiers are normally allocated to an examining division that is responsible 
for examining applications in the technical field in which the particular 
application was classified by the search division or ISA that carried out the 
search. It is usual for the first member entrusted with the examination of the 
application in accordance with Art. 18(2) to be the same person who 
prepared the (supplementary) European search report and search opinion 
or, where the EPO was the ISA or the authority specified for the 
supplementary international search, the international search report and 
WO-ISA or the supplementary international search report. 
Art. 153(4), (6) and 
(7) 
Art. 150(2) 
Rule 159(1)(f) 
Art. 121 
Rule 136(3) 
Rule 160(1) 
Rule 36 
 

Part C – Chapter II-3 
There may, however, be instances where it is appropriate to allocate the 
application to an examining division comprising examiners who are not 
normally responsible for the indicated part of the International Patent 
Classification (IPC) and who might not have been involved at the search 
stage. There are a number of possible reasons for this: e.g. to make it 
possible, where appropriate, that a parent and a divisional application are 
dealt with by the same examining division (this could sometimes be more 
efficient, even when the two applications are classified in different technical 
fields); or if the classification of the published application does not 
correspond to the subject-matter of the application in the form in which it 
reaches the substantive examiner (e.g. because the application has been 
amended after receipt of the search report and search opinion). 
3. Response filed before first communication in examination 
3.1 Response to the search opinion 
Following receipt of the search report and search opinion, and prior to the 
first communication from the examining division, the applicant must (subject 
to certain exceptions) respond to the search opinion by filing amendments 
to the description, claims or drawings and/or filing observations on the 
objections raised in the search opinion (see B-XI, 8 for details, in particular 
as to the exceptions where no reply is required). To avoid delays, care 
should be taken to comply with the requirements of Rule 137(4) when filing 
such amendments (see OJ EPO 2009, 533, point 7). Any amendments filed 
at this stage are made voluntarily by the applicant in accordance with 
Rule 137(2) (for more details, see C-III, 2.1). 
The applicant's response to the search opinion required by Rule 70a (or 
filed voluntarily in response to search opinions not requiring a response) 
will be taken into account by the examining division when drafting the first 
communication. Failure to respond to this communication in due time will 
result in the application being deemed withdrawn according to Art. 94(4), 
although this loss of rights is subject to further processing (see E-VIII, 2). 
With regard to what constitutes a valid response, see B-XI, 8. 
If the applicant accepts a search division's suggestion regarding an 
acceptable form of amendment of the claims to overcome the objections 
raised (see B-XI, 3.8), they are requested to adapt the description to the 
claims on file and delete or amend any statements or expressions throwing 
doubt on the scope of protection (see F-IV, 4.3). 
In exceptional cases, the examining division may decide to issue a 
summons to oral proceedings as the first action in examination proceedings 
(see C-III, 5). In such a case, the applicant's response to the search opinion 
will be taken into account when drafting the annex to the summons. 
If the European search report or supplementary European search report 
was accompanied by a search opinion but was drawn up before 
1 April 2010 (such that a reply to the search opinion was not mandatory, 
see B-XI, 8) and the applicant did not reply to it, a communication referring 
to the search opinion and setting a time limit for reply is issued as the first 
communication under Art. 94(3). Failure to respond to this communication 
Rule 137(2) 
Rule 70(2) 
Rule 70a 
Art. 94(3) and (4) 
Rule 62(1) 
Part C – Chapter II-4 

 
in due time results in the application being deemed withdrawn according to 
Art. 94(4). 
The procedure explained in the above paragraphs also applies to 
Euro-PCT applications for which the EPO prepares a supplementary 
European search report and a search opinion (see B-II, 4.3 and B-XI, 1.1). 
3.2 Response to PCT actions prepared by the EPO 
For Euro-PCT applications where the EPO acted as the International 
Searching Authority (ISA) and, where a demand under Art. 31 PCT was 
filed, also as the International Preliminary Examining Authority (IPEA) or 
the Supplementary International Searching Authority (SISA), the applicant 
will already have responded to a negative WO-ISA, IPER or supplementary 
international search report prepared by the EPO (unless the communication 
under Rule 161 was issued before 1 April 2010 – see E-IX, 3.3.3). 
This response may comprise amendments and/or observations filed in 
response to the communication under Rule 161(1) (or possibly filed earlier 
– see E-IX, 3.3.1). 
If the applicant accepts the search division's suggestion regarding an 
acceptable form of amendment of the claims to overcome the objections 
raised (see PCT-EPO Guidelines, B-XI, 3.3), they are requested to adapt 
the description to the claims on file and delete or amend any statements or 
expressions throwing doubt on the scope of protection (see F-IV, 4.3). 
Any amendments filed at this stage are made voluntarily by the applicant in 
accordance with Rule 137(2) (for more details see C-III, 2.2). This response 
will be taken into account by the examining division when drafting the first 
communication under Art. 94(3) or, in exceptional cases, the annex to the 
summons to oral proceedings (C-III, 5). For more details, see E-IX, 4.1, 
E-IX, 4.2 and E-IX, 4.3. 
3.3 The invitation under Rule 70a(1) 
Under Rule 70a(1), the applicant is invited to respond to the European 
search opinion (ESOP) within the period referred to in Rule 70(1) or, where 
applicable, the period referred to in Rule 70(2) (see B-XI, 8) unless they 
have waived their right to receive the communication under Rule 70(2) 
(see C-VI, 3). 
Where the request for examination (including payment of the examination 
fee) is filed after the search report has been transmitted to the applicant, 
the applicant must respond to the ESOP within the period referred to in 
Rule 70(1). In such cases, the invitation under Rule 70a(1) is sent in a 
combined communication with the communication under Rule 69(1) 
(see A-VI, 2.1). This communication under Rule 70a(1) and Rule 69(1) is 
issued shortly after the mention of the European search report's publication 
in the European Patent Bulletin (in general, this is approximately one week 
later). 
Where the request for examination (including payment of the examination 
fee) is filed before the search report has been transmitted to the applicant, 
Rule 161(1) 
 

Part C – Chapter II-5 
the applicant must respond to the ESOP within the period referred to in 
Rule 70(2). In such cases, the invitation under Rule 70a(1) is sent in a 
combined communication with the communication under Rule 70(2). With 
regard to how the period referred to in Rule 70(2) is calculated for these 
cases, see C-II, 1.1 for Euro-direct applications and C-II, 1.2 for Euro-PCT 
applications for which a supplementary European search report is 
prepared. 
4. Designation fees, extension and validation fees 
Under Rule 39(1), the designation fees can be validly paid up to the same 
time limit as the examination fee and therefore will be generally paid at the 
same time as the examination fee. The examination of whether and to what 
extent a designation fee has been validly paid has been entrusted to the 
formalities officer under Rule 11(3); see the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 12 December 2013, OJ EPO 2014, A6; OJ EPO 2015, A104. 
The same applies to the examination of whether extension or validation 
fees have been paid; see A-III, 12.2. 
5. Copy of the search results on the priority or priorities 
If, when the examining division assumes responsibility, the EPO notes that 
a copy of the results of a search on the claimed priority or priorities as 
referred to in Rule 141(1) has not been filed by the applicant and is not 
deemed duly filed under Rule 141(2) (see A-III, 6.12), it invites the applicant 
to file, within a period of two months, the copy or a statement that the 
results of the search referred to in Rule 141(1) are not available to them. 
This requirement applies to European or Euro-PCT applications filed on or 
after 1 January 2011 (see OJ EPO 2009, 585). This communication is also 
sent in cases where the priority in question has since been withdrawn or 
has lapsed. 
Failure to reply to this invitation in due time results in the application being 
deemed withdrawn. Further processing is available for this loss of rights 
(see E-VIII, 2). 
The search results provided by the applicant will be included in the file and 
will be open to file inspection (see A-XI). 
Rule 39(1) 
Art. 90(3) 
Rule 70b(1) 
Rule 70b(2) 
 

Part C – Chapter III-1 
Chapter III – The first stage of examination 
1. Missing parts or elements 
1.1 European patent applications 
1.1.1 Application documents filed under Rule 56 or Rule 56a 
Where the applicant has supplied missing drawings or parts of the 
description after the accordance of a filing date (see A-II, 5) under Rule 56 
and the Receiving Section has determined that the missing drawings or 
parts of the description are "completely contained" in the claimed priority 
application, the application is not redated to the date on which the missing 
drawings or parts of the description were supplied. The same applies to 
correct application documents or parts filed after the accordance of a filing 
date (see A-II, 6) under Rule 56a. 
The examining division may review the findings of the Receiving Section on 
the applicability of Rule 56(3) and Rule 56a unless there has been a 
decision of a board of appeal. 
Normally this review will have been initiated at the search stage (see 
B-III, 3.3.1 and B-XI, 2.1). However, it can still be started during substantive 
examination. 
For the criteria for determining whether the "completely contained" 
requirement of Rule 56(3) and Rule 56a is satisfied, see A-II, 5.4.2 and 
A-II, 6.4.1 respectively. 
Should the examining division conclude, contrary to the original finding of 
the Receiving Section, that the missing elements are not "completely 
contained" in the priority document, it will raise an objection under Rule 56 
or Rule 56a in the first communication under Art. 94(3), presenting detailed 
arguments as to why the "completely contained" requirement is not 
satisfied. In addition, it will warn that non-compliance with the requirements 
of Rule 56(3) or Rule 56a(4) as applicable can result in redating, which in 
turn can lead to loss of a priority right if the redating causes the filing date 
to be more than 12 months after the claimed priority date. 
Note that if the review was initiated at the search stage and an objection 
under Rule 56 or Rule 56a was raised in the extended European search 
report (EESR), the applicant may already have submitted a response to the 
search opinion (required by Rule 70a or filed voluntarily in response to a 
search opinion not requiring a response). The examining division will treat 
this response in the same manner as the reply to the first communication. 
If the applicant replies by withdrawing the missing parts or the subsequently 
filed correct application documents or parts, the examination will continue 
as normal with the original filing date, but without the missing parts or the 
correct application documents or parts (see also A-II, 5.5 and F-III, 10). 
If the applicant succeeds in arguing in their reply that the "completely 
contained" requirement is satisfied, the examination will continue as normal 
Rule 56 
Rule 56a 
Part C – Chapter III-2 

 
with the missing parts or the subsequently filed correct application 
documents or parts, as the case may be, and with the original filing date. 
If the applicant maintains the missing parts or the subsequently filed correct 
application documents or parts and their arguments do not succeed, the 
examining division will issue a further communication under Art. 94(3) 
informing them of the application's impending redating to the date on which 
the EPO received the missing parts or the correct application documents or 
parts. This communication gives the applicant a further opportunity to 
withdraw the subsequently filed missing parts or the correct application 
documents or parts within a time limit of two months (Rule 132(2)) so as to 
restore the original filing date or to request an appealable decision on the 
redating. It indicates the reasons why the "completely contained" 
requirement is not met and also deals with any counter-arguments 
presented by the applicant. 
If the applicant does not reply to the above communication in due time, the 
application is deemed withdrawn (Art. 94(4)). 
If the applicant opts to withdraw the subsequently filed missing parts or the 
correct application documents or parts, the redating of the application will 
be deemed not made (see also B-XI, 2.1). The examiner will continue the 
examination procedure as normal with the original filing date but without 
missing parts and/or the correct application documents or parts (see also 
F-III, 10). 
If the applicant does not agree with the finding, they may (within 
two months (Rule 132(2)) request an appealable decision on the matter. In 
this case, the examining division will issue a reasoned decision informing 
them of the new filing date, the reasons for the redating and (where 
appropriate) the detrimental effect of the redating on the claimed priority 
right. This decision will allow a separate appeal according to Art. 106(2). 
Once the period for filing an appeal has expired without an appeal being 
filed, the examiner will resume examination on the basis of the new filing 
date. Note that the EESR may contain documents that could become 
relevant as a result of the redating. 
If the applicant files an appeal in due time, the file passes to a board of 
appeal to review the decision on the filing date's accordance. The 
examining division will not continue substantive examination while the case 
is pending before the board. Once the board has issued a decision, the file 
will be returned to the examining division, which will be bound on this point 
by the board's decision (Art. 111(2)). It will then resume examination on the 
basis of the filing date fixed by the board. 
1.1.2 Claims filed after accordance of a date of filing 
If the claims were not present at the application's filing date, the examining 
division must check whether the subsequently filed claims satisfy the 
requirements of Art. 123(2). If the basis for these subsequently filed claims 
in the application as filed has not been indicated by the applicant 
(see H-III, 2.1) and the application is one of those mentioned in H-III, 2.1.4, 
Rule 111 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part C – Chapter III-3 
the examining division may send the applicant a communication under 
Rule 137(4) requesting this information (see H-III, 2.1.1). 
1.2 Euro-PCT applications – missing elements and parts filed under 
Rule 20.5 and 20.6 PCT 
In the case of PCT applications, missing drawings and parts of the 
description, but also missing claims, may have been filed at the receiving 
Office for international applications under Rules 20.5 and 20.6 PCT, and its 
finding can be reviewed in accordance with Rule 82ter.1 PCT. The 
examining division will review this finding in all cases in which the filing date 
was retained on the basis of the "completely contained" requirement using 
the same criteria as applied when assessing compliance with Rule 56(3) 
(see A-II, 5.4.2). 
If either the EPO acted as the ISA or a supplementary EESR has been 
issued, this review will normally have been initiated at the search stage 
(see B-III, 3.3.1 and B-XI, 2.1). However, it can still be started during 
substantive examination. The procedure is the same as for European 
patent applications (see C-III, 1.1.1). 
1.3 Euro-PCT applications – erroneous elements filed under 
Rule 20.5bis PCT 
Rule 20.5bis PCT allows applicants to correct an erroneously filed element 
(description or claims) or part of the description, claims or drawings 
(including all drawings) contained in an international application. 
Incorporations by reference by the receiving Office under Rule 20.5bis(d) 
PCT, i.e. without changing the filing date, are effective before the EPO as 
designated or elected Office for international applications filed on or after 
1 November 2022. For details, see the notice from the EPO dated 23 June 
2022, OJ EPO 2022, A71. On entry into the European phase, the normal 
procedures apply on the basis that the correct and erroneously filed parts 
are thus part of the application as filed (see E-IX, 2). 
For international applications filed between 1 July 2020 and 31 October 
2022, the provisions under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT remain not fully applicable 
(see the notice from the EPO dated 14 June 2020, OJ EPO 2020, A81). 
The EPO adopts the following practice in respect of those applications: 
corrections accepted by the receiving Office during the international phase 
under either Rule 20.5bis(b) PCT or Rule 20.5bis(c) PCT – i.e. where it 
accorded the date of receipt of the correct application documents or a later 
date as the filing date of the application or shifted the initial filing date of the 
application to the date of receipt of the correct application documents – will 
be effective in proceedings before the EPO as designated/elected Office 
(see OJ EPO 2020, A81). 
However, if the receiving Office considered the correct application 
documents to be incorporated by reference under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT, i.e. 
without changing the filing date, this incorporation will not be effective in 
proceedings before the EPO as designated/elected Office. In such cases, 
the EPO will, on entry into the European phase, consider the filing date of 
the application to be the date on which the correct application documents 
Part C – Chapter III-4 

 
were received (Rule 20.8(c) PCT and Rule 20.5bis(b) or (c) PCT). 
Furthermore, it will consider the application as filed to include the correct 
application documents but not the erroneously filed ones. The EPO will 
inform the applicant about this in a communication under Rules 20.8(c) 
PCT and 82ter.1(c) and (d) PCT, setting a time limit of two months for reply. 
(i) 
If, within the time limit, the applicant requests that the correct 
application documents be disregarded under Rule 82ter.1(d) PCT, 
the EPO will issue an interlocutory decision changing the filing date 
to the date initially accorded by the receiving Office and confirming 
that the procedure before the EPO as designated/elected Office will 
be based on the application documents as filed on that date. 
(ii) 
If the applicant files observations with regard to the communication 
under Rule 20.8(c) PCT and Rule 82ter.1(c) and (d) PCT within the 
time limit set, the EPO will also issue an interlocutory decision taking 
into account the observations made. 
(iii) 
If the applicant does not file observations and does not request that 
the correct application documents be disregarded, an interlocutory 
decision will not be issued. In this case, the EPO will stick to its 
findings. 
Applicants interested in avoiding this procedure, namely the issuing of the 
communication under Rules 20.8(c) PCT and 82ter.1(c) and (d) PCT and 
the setting of a time limit of two months for reply, may make use of the 
abridged procedure. According to it, they may, within the 31-month time 
limit under Rule 159(1), at the time of validly requesting early processing or, 
at the latest, before the communication under Rules 20.8(c) and 82ter.1(c) 
and (d) PCT is issued: 
(a) 
request that the EPO disregard the correct application documents. In 
that case, no such communication but an interlocutory decision will 
be issued. This decision will confirm that the application maintains 
the initial filing date and that the correct application documents will be 
disregarded in the procedure before the EPO as designated/elected 
Office. 
(b) 
confirm that they wish to pursue the application with the filing date 
corresponding to the date of receipt of the correct application 
documents and with those correct application documents. In that 
case, no invitation and no interlocutory decision will be issued. The 
EPO will correct the filing date and consider the erroneously filed 
application documents not to have been filed. The applicant will be 
informed accordingly. 
Once the procedure described above has been finalised, a communication 
under Rules 161 and 162 will be issued and the applicant may amend the 
application within the scope of the disclosure on the filing date as 
determined in this procedure. 
 

Part C – Chapter III-5 
As a consequence of the procedure described above, it may happen that 
the application documents as originally filed differ from those forming the 
basis for the search in the international phase. If the EPO acted as ISA, the 
examiner has to check carefully whether the invention forming the basis for 
the European phase was covered by a search in the international phase. If 
this is not the case, an invitation under Rule 164(2) will be issued 
(see C-III, 3.1). 
If the subject-matter forming the basis for European phase processing is 
covered by the international search report, then examination continues as 
usual but taking into account that the potential change of the filing date 
might have an impact on intermediary documents cited in the international 
search report and that the priority might not be valid anymore. 
For more details and examples, see OJ EPO 2020, A81. 
2. Amendments made by applicants of their own volition 
Any amendment, including any made by the applicant of their own volition, 
must satisfy the following conditions: 
(i) 
it must not add subject-matter to the content of the application as 
filed (see H-IV, 2.3 and H-V, 1 to H-V, 7); 
(ii) 
it must not itself cause the application as amended to be 
objectionable under the EPC, e.g. the amendment must not introduce 
a lack of clarity into the claims (Art. 84); and 
(iii) 
it must comply with Rule 137(5) (see H-IV, 4.1). 
If the amendments do not meet these conditions, the applicant should be 
told that the amended application cannot be allowed. Apart from the 
amendments referred to in C-III, 2.1 and 2.2, which are admissible under 
Rule 137(2), the applicant may correct obvious errors at any time 
(see H-VI, 2.2.1). 
If the applicant makes amendments but does not identify them and/or 
indicate their basis in the application as filed (see H-III, 2.1) and the 
application is one of those mentioned in H-III, 2.1.4, the examining division 
may send the applicant a communication under Rule 137(4) requesting this 
information (see H-III, 2.1.1). 
If the applicant accepts a search division's suggestion regarding an 
acceptable form of amendment of the claims to overcome the objections 
raised (see B-XI, 3.8), they are requested to adapt the description to the 
claims on file and delete or amend any statements or expressions throwing 
doubt on the scope of protection (see F-IV, 4.3). 
2.1 Amendments made in response to the search opinion 
The amendments referred to in C-II, 3.1 are made by the applicant of their 
own volition (the applicant is required to respond to the search opinion in 
the EESR but does not necessarily have to respond by filing amendments; 
they can also respond by filing observations on the search opinion – 
Art. 123(2) 
Rule 137(2) and (3) 
Part C – Chapter III-6 

 
see B-XI, 8). This means that the applicant is not restricted to amendments 
necessary to remedy a defect in the application. Further amendments may 
be made only with the consent of the examining division (see H-II, 2.3). 
2.2 Amendments made in response to the WO-ISA, IPER or 
supplementary international search report 
For Euro-PCT applications where the EPO acted as ISA or SISA, any 
amendments filed in response to the communication under Rule 161(1) 
(see E-IX, 3.3.4) are made by the applicant of their own volition. This 
means they may be submitted to overcome objections raised in the 
WO-ISA, IPER or supplementary international search report or they may be 
suggested for some other reason, e.g. to remedy some lack of clarity that 
the applicant has noted in the original documents. In order to avoid delays, 
care should be taken to comply with the requirements of Rule 137(4) when 
filing such amendments. Furthermore, the applicant may also file 
observations in place of or in addition to amendments. 
3. 
Unity of invention 
3.1 Searches under Rule 164(2) 
For Euro-PCT applications where the EPO acted as ISA or as SISA, the 
examining division under Rule 164(2) assesses the application documents 
upon expiry of the six-month time limit set in the communication under 
Rule 161 and Rule 162. For any claimed invention or group of inventions 
within the meaning of Art. 82 not searched by the EPO in its capacity as 
ISA or SISA, the examining division issues an invitation to pay search fees. 
The application documents as amended may contain claims directed to a 
non-searched invention in situations other than where the application 
documents that are to serve as the basis for examination do not meet the 
requirement of unity of invention. 
For instance, the amended application may contain just one invention, but it 
may be an invention that was claimed but not searched by the EPO as 
(S)ISA in the international phase. In this case, there is no non-unity 
objection for this set of claims and the reasoning in the invitation needs only 
to refer to the non-unity objection in the WO-ISA and to the fact that no 
additional fee was paid for this invention during the international phase. 
It may well be that an invention in the application documents was not even 
claimed in the application documents that served as the basis for the 
procedure in the international phase and has been imported from the 
description (see F-V, 7.1(iv)). In such a case, an invitation to pay search 
fees under Rule 164(2) for any non-searched invention is to be issued by 
the examining division, irrespective of whether lack of unity persists in the 
claims. The invitation under Rule 164(2) must state that – and why – this is 
a new invention not searched in the international phase. If there are other 
inventions present in the claims that were also not searched (but were 
claimed in the PCT phase), the applicant must also be invited by way of the 
same invitation to pay further search fees in respect of those inventions. In 
assessing whether or not subject-matter present in amended claims 
constitutes a previously unclaimed invention imported from the description 
Rule 137(2) 
Rule 164(2) 
 

Part C – Chapter III-7 
(for which an invitation under Rule 164(2) is to be sent), the principles laid 
down for assessing compliance with Rule 137(5) (see in H-IV, 4.1.2) are to 
be taken into account. 
The application documents forming the basis for the European phase may 
also cover inventions or groups of inventions not searched in the 
(supplementary) international search report as a result of the procedure for 
erroneously filed elements under Rule 20.5bis PCT (see C-III, 1.3). In this 
case too, an invitation to pay search fees under Rule 164(2) is to be issued 
by the examining division. 
The invitation under Rule 164(2) must be sent before any communication 
under Art. 94(3). For Rule 164(2) to apply, the claims must be sufficiently 
clear to allow the identification of a non-searched invention triggering the 
procedure under Rule 164(2). If the claims are so unclear that a 
non-searched invention cannot be identified, the first action must be to 
issue a communication under Art. 94(3) setting out the objections under 
Art. 84. Should it turn out later in the procedure that amended claims are 
indeed directed to a non-searched invention, the applicant must file a 
divisional application for any such subject-matter. Recourse to Rule 164(2) 
is not provided for if, as a result of further amendments or clarification, 
(further) non-searched inventions are identified, since the procedure under 
Rule 164(2) applies to the application documents as submitted by the 
applicant as the basis for examination. 
If auxiliary requests are submitted before a search under Rule 164(2) is 
performed, only the main request is taken into account for the purpose of 
the search (notwithstanding the exceptions relating to cases under 
Rule 62a or Rule 63 where main and auxiliary requests are both considered 
at the search stage, see B-VIII, 3.2.2 and B-VIII, 4.2.2). 
If any search fees are paid in due time, the results of the searches are 
communicated to the applicant as an annex to a communication under 
Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1) and (2) or under Rule 71(3), as set out in 
Rule 164(2)(b). This annex is entitled "Search result according to 
Rule 164(2)". 
If the applicant pays the search fees in due time under Rule 164(2) and at 
the same time files a new set of claims, the search will be carried out and 
the written opinion issued for the claims on file upon expiry of the period 
under Rule 161 for which the invitation to pay was sent and the requested 
fees paid. The amended documents may, however, informally be taken into 
account by the examiner carrying out the search, where this appears 
appropriate. Applicants will have the opportunity to file amendments of their 
own volition after receiving the results of the search under Rule 164(2) 
annexed to the communication under Art. 94(3) (see H-II, 2.3). 
If search fees are not paid in due time under Rule 164(2), a communication 
under Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1) and (2) or under Rule 71(3) will be issued 
and the examining division will require deletion from the claims of any 
subject-matter that was not searched either because a search fee under 
Rule 164(2) was not paid (see H-II, 6) or for a different reason (see 
Part C – Chapter III-8 

 
H-IV, 4). Before the patent is granted, this subject-matter should be either 
deleted from the description and drawings or indicated as not forming part 
of the claimed invention (see F-IV, 4.3(iii)). 
A communication under Rule 164(2)(b) deals with all objections for each of 
the inventions searched in accordance with Rule 164(2). For claims relating 
to inventions already searched by the EPO in the international phase that 
have been amended but still lack unity, it is sufficient to argue in detail why 
lack of unity is still present. The communication, where appropriate, further 
requests the applicant to limit the application to a single searched invention 
(see Rule 164(2)(c)). 
It follows from Rule 164(2)(b) and (c) that the special procedure under 
Rule 164(2) as set out in H-II, 2.3 ends upon expiry of the time limit set in 
the communication issued under Rule 164(2)(b). This means that the 
applicant's right to make amendments of their own volition ends upon 
expiry of that time limit. 
Furthermore, the special procedure as set out in F-V, 7.1(iv), which 
exempts amendments from the requirements of Rule 137(5), first sentence, 
ends upon expiry of the time limit under Rule 161(1). Such amendments 
will result in an invitation under Rule 164(2)(a) and allow the applicant to 
obtain a search of unsearched subject-matter referred to in Rule 137(5). 
However, any amendments submitted after expiry of the time limit under 
Rule 161(1) are subject to the requirements of Rule 137(5), first sentence 
(see H-IV, 4.1.2). 
The EPO's obligations under Rule 164(2) are fulfilled and the applicant's 
rights under this rule are exhausted once a single communication under 
Rule 164(2) has been sent. It follows that in cases of cascading non-unity 
no (further) invitation under Rule 164(2) is sent. The same applies if, during 
the examination procedure, claims are added or existing claims amended 
so that they relate to non-searched inventions. 
Exceptional cases may arise where the following sequence of events has 
occurred in the international phase: 
(i) 
The EPO acted as ISA in the international phase 
(ii) 
The EPO acting as ISA invited the applicant to pay one or more 
additional 
international 
search 
fees 
in 
accordance 
with 
Art. 17(3)(a) PCT and Rule 40 PCT (due to a lack of unity according 
to Rule 13 PCT) 
(iii) 
The applicant paid at least one such additional search fee 
(iv) 
The additional search or searches led to a further objection as to a 
lack of unity a posteriori (a cascading lack of unity), resulting in one 
of the inventions identified in the invitation under Art. 17(3)(a) PCT 
and Rule 40 PCT being further subdivided and resulting in 
sub-inventions not originally identified in that invitation 
 

Part C – Chapter III-9 
(v) 
The EPO did not search all such sub-inventions. 
In the above case, the EPO will invite the applicant to pay search fees for 
any such unsearched sub-inventions in the claims that are to form the basis 
for examination on expiry of the six-month period under Rule 161(1), in 
accordance with Rule 164(2). 
Where the EPO acted as SISA in accordance with Rule 45bis.9 PCT, it 
may make a finding of a lack of unity of the international application 
according to Rule 45bis.6(a) PCT. However, in the procedure before the 
SISA, the applicant cannot pay additional supplementary international 
search fees, and the supplementary international search report will be 
directed only to the invention or unitary group of inventions first mentioned 
in the claims (Rule 45bis.6(a) PCT). Where such an application contains 
unsearched inventions in the claims that are to form the basis for 
examination on expiry of the six-month period under Rule 161(1), a 
communication under Rule 164(2) is issued allowing the applicant to have 
these inventions searched upon payment of search fees and to pursue one 
of them in the examination proceedings. 
Rule 164(2)(b) provides for a right to amend the application in response to 
the results of any search under Rule 164(2). This means that applicants 
may make amendments of their own volition once in response to the 
communication under Art. 94(3) to which the search results under 
Rule 164(2) are annexed (H-II, 2.3). 
3.2 Relation to unity in search; limitation to searched invention 
An objection of lack of unity of invention, if applicable, should already have 
been raised at the search stage. If such an objection was not raised, but 
the examining division nevertheless considers that the requirements of 
Art. 82 are clearly not met, the question of lack of unity will be addressed as 
early as possible during examination (see F-V, 7.1 and H-II, 6.3). 
When raising a finding of lack of unity or upholding an earlier one objected 
to by the applicant on the basis of unconvincing reasons, the examining 
division will invite the applicant to limit the application to one invention or 
group of inventions. In response to such an invitation, applicants must 
clearly indicate which searched invention they wish to prosecute further. If 
the response is unclear, the examining division must seek clarification 
before continuing with the examination (see T 736/14). 
3.2.1 No additional search fees paid 
If applicants have not availed themselves of the opportunity to have the 
search results on the other inventions included in the search report 
because they have paid no additional search fees in response to the 
invitation under Rule 64(1) (see B-VII, 1.2) or 164(1) (see B-VII, 2.3), they 
will be assumed to have elected to proceed with the application on the 
basis of the searched invention (see G 2/92). In cases where a 
communication under Rule 164(2) has been sent (see C-III, 3.1), 
Rule 164(2)(c) requires the applicant to delete all unsearched inventions 
from the claims. 
Art. 82 
Rule 64 
Rule 164(1) and (2) 
Part C – Chapter III-10 

 
Final responsibility for establishing whether the application meets the 
requirement of unity of invention ultimately rests with the examining division 
(see T 631/97). When considering the issue of unity, the examining division 
will consider both the reasons given in the search opinion and the 
applicant's response (see B-XI, 8 for details of when a response to the 
search opinion is required); for Euro-PCT applications where no 
supplementary European search report is prepared, the examining division 
will consider the reasons given in the WO-ISA, IPER or supplementary 
international search report prepared by the EPO and the applicant's 
response as required by Rule 161(1) (see E-IX, 3.2). In the absence of any 
convincing response from the applicant to the issue of unity as raised 
earlier, the examining division will normally initially uphold the position 
taken earlier (see B-XI, 1.2) and will then require deletion of all the 
inventions other than that which has been searched. If the examining 
division is convinced, e.g. by arguments from the applicant, that the opinion 
on unity at the search stage was incorrect, then an additional search is 
performed for that part of the subject-matter that is judged to be unitary with 
an invention that was searched (see B-II, 4.2(iii) and C-IV, 7.3) and the 
examination is carried out on those claims that comply with the requirement 
of unity of invention. The applicant may file a divisional application for any 
excised subject-matter (see C-III, 3.3). 
3.2.2 Additional search fees paid 
If the applicant has taken the opportunity to have other inventions 
searched, they may decide that the application is to proceed on the basis of 
one of these inventions and to delete the others. If the applicant has not yet 
done so and if the examining division maintains the objection of lack of 
unity (see C-III, 3.2), it should invite the applicant at the beginning of 
substantive examination to state which invention the prosecution of the 
application should be based on and to limit the application accordingly by 
excising those parts belonging to the other inventions. For the latter 
inventions, the applicant may file divisional applications (see C-III, 3.3). 
3.2.3 Invitation to pay additional search fees combined with 
invitation to restrict the scope of the search 
In exceptional cases, an invitation to pay additional search fees under 
Rule 64(1), Rule 164(1) or Rule 164(2) may be combined with an invitation 
to restrict the scope of the search under Rule 62a(1) and/or Rule 63(1). 
When the application enters the examination phase or, in the case of 
Rule 164(2), after the reply to the first communication, the examiner will 
check whether the claims on which substantive examination is based meet 
the requirement of unity of invention (Art. 82) and cover only subject-matter 
that has been searched. If the claims lack unity of invention, the applicant 
will be invited to limit the claims to one searched invention and to exclude 
all unsearched subject-matter from the scope of the claims. If, in reply to 
the objection raised by the examiner, the applicant fails to respond 
adequately (either by amending the claims or by submitting convincing 
arguments) and the non-unity objection can be maintained, the application 
may be refused under Art. 97(2) in conjunction with Art. 82 (see H-II, 6.3 
and 6.4), provided that the right to be heard, which includes the right to oral 
proceedings if so requested (Art. 116(1)), has been respected. 
 

Part C – Chapter III-11 
If the original set of claims has been amended before entering the 
examination phase or, in the case of Rule 164(2), in reply to the first 
communication such as to meet the requirements of Art. 82 but includes 
subject-matter that was excluded from the search following an invitation 
under Rule 62a(1) and/or Rule 63(1), the examiner will either (i) invite the 
applicant to limit the set of claims to the searched subject-matter under 
Rule 62a(2) and/or Rule 63(3) or (ii) raise an objection under Rule 137(5) 
against the claims concerned (see H-IV, 4.1.2). In cases under Rule 164(2), 
if 
the 
first 
communication 
already 
included 
the 
relevant 
objections/invitations and the right to be heard has been respected, the 
application may be refused. 
If, in reply to the invitation under Rule 62a(2) or 63(3), the applicant fails to 
respond adequately (either by amending the claims or by submitting 
convincing arguments), the application may be refused under Art. 97(2), 
provided that the right to be heard has been respected (see F-IV, 3.3). 
3.3 Excision of other inventions; filing divisional applications 
The applicant may file divisional applications for inventions deleted in 
accordance with C-III, 3.2.1 or 3.2.2. 
A divisional application may only be filed if the application being divided is 
still pending (see A-IV, 1.1.1). 
3.4 Refund of additional search fees 
If the applicant has paid further search fees in response to an invitation 
under Rule 64(1), 164(1) or (2) and has requested a refund, the examining 
division is required to review the validity of the finding of lack of unity (see 
also F-V, 4 to F-V, 7). 
A refund request should be handled promptly. If the examiner concludes 
that it should not be granted, the applicant is informed of the examining 
division's preliminary opinion in a communication under Art. 94(3). This 
preliminary opinion takes into account the arguments put forward by the 
applicant in their reply to the search opinion. The applicant is informed that 
they may request an interlocutory decision on the refund, allowing a 
separate appeal under Art. 106(2). If there is a pending request for oral 
proceedings, the applicant is also invited in the communication to clarify 
whether this request also applies to the issuing of the interlocutory decision 
on the request for refund. If the applicant confirms this to be the case, oral 
proceedings will have to be held before a negative decision on the request 
for refund can be issued. 
An interlocutory decision should be issued at the earliest opportunity, 
subject to the requirements of Art. 113(1), and not left until the final 
decision on the application. Of course, if the stage in the procedure when 
the examiner is in a position to issue the decision on the refund coincides 
with the issuing of either a Rule 71(3) communication or a decision refusing 
the application, then, in the former case, the interlocutory decision can be 
issued with the Rule 71(3) communication; in the latter case, the decision 
on the refund can be included in the decision refusing the application. The 
Rule 36 
Rule 64(2) 
Rule 164(5) 
Part C – Chapter III-12 

 
examiner ensures that the interlocutory decision issued on this matter 
clearly states that a separate appeal under Art. 106(2) is allowed. 
The same procedure applies to the refund of search fees paid under 
Rule 164(1) and (2). 
Rule 164(5) provides for a refund of any search fee paid under 
Rule 164(1) or (2) in line with Rule 64(2) (see A-X, 10.2.2). Where the 
applicant pays a search fee in response to the Rule 164(2) invitation and at 
the same contests the basis for requiring payment of a search fee and 
requests its refund under Rule 164(5), the examining division may deal 
directly with this issue in the communication under Art. 94(3) and 
Rule 71(1) or (2) that accompanies the search results under Rule 164(2). 
Such an immediate review of the applicant's request is not possible in 
cases under Rules 64(1) and 164(1) until the examining division assumes 
responsibility for the application. 
The review under Rule 64(2) or 164(5) is restricted to a reconsideration of 
the validity of the original finding under the circumstances existing at the 
time the Rule 64(1), 164(1) or (2) invitation was sent, taking into account 
only the prior art that was available at that time. For more details on the 
assessment of unity of invention, see F-V. 
The issue of refunds of additional international search fees paid to the 
EPO acting as ISA in response to an invitation under Art. 17(3)(a) PCT, 
however, does not arise in the European phase because these fees were 
paid in the international phase, which is closed by this stage of the 
procedure. The applicant may contest the payment of additional 
international search fees to the EPO acting as ISA by paying these under 
protest according to Rule 40.2(c) PCT. However, this must be done in the 
international phase (see also the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 9 June 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A59, and the notice from the EPO dated 
24 March 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 322). 
3.5 Changing from one searched invention to another 
Once the applicant has limited the claims to one searched invention, the 
examining division will refuse to admit amendments involving switching to a 
different searched invention (for further information, see H-II, 6.1). 
4. 
First communication 
If deficiencies persist in the application even after the applicant has filed 
their response to the search opinion, the examining division will issue a 
communication under Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1), (2) in subsequent 
examination proceedings and will consider the applicant's reply before 
issuing a negative decision or a summons to oral proceedings. For the 
exceptional case where a summons to oral proceedings is issued as the 
first action in examination proceedings, see C-III, 5. 
When drawing up such a communication (or exceptionally the summons to 
oral proceedings), the examining division will take into account the 
documents (if any) cited in the search report and any further documents 
found as a result of the search referred to in C-IV, 7.1 as well as any 
Rule 71(1) and (2) 
Rule 132 
Art. 94(3) 
 

Part C – Chapter III-13 
amendments proposed or comments made by the applicant in reply to the 
search 
opinion 
(see B-XI, 8) 
or 
the 
Rule 161(1) 
communication 
(see E-IX, 3). The examiner should identify in this communication any EPC 
requirements that, in their opinion, the application does not satisfy. The 
communication will give reasons for any objections raised and invite the 
applicant within a specified period to file observations or submit 
amendments. The filed application documents are not sent back to the 
applicant although a copy of the description and claims may be sent in 
appropriate cases (see H-III, 2). The examiner will re-examine the 
application once the applicant has replied. 
If no search opinion has been issued (see C-VI, 3, F-V, 7.1(ii) and 
B-XI, 1.1), the examiner's first communication under Art. 94(3) will, as a 
general rule (see B-XI, 3) and by analogy with the search opinion, cover all 
objections to the application (see B-XI, 3.4 for exceptional cases where not 
all objections are raised). A summons will not be issued as the first office 
action in examination proceedings in such a case. 
4.1 Reasoning 
4.1.1 Reasoned objections 
As with the search opinion, for each objection, the communication should 
indicate the part of the application that is deficient and the EPC requirement 
not met, either by referring to specific articles or rules or by other clear 
indication; it should also give the reason for any objection where not 
immediately apparent (for more details see B-XI, 3.2). 
The burden of proof and the onus to present the relevant facts about 
patentability requirements lie initially with the examining division, which 
must provide evidence and facts to support its objection (see T 655/13). 
Accordingly, prior-art documents forming the basis for novelty or inventive 
step objections must be cited in such a way that these conclusions can be 
checked without difficulty (see E-X, 2.6). 
4.1.2 Positive statements/suggestions 
Where appropriate, the communication should also contain positive 
statements on patentability where some of the claims meet the patentability 
requirements (see B-XI, 3.2.2). In this phase of the proceedings, the 
examiner should make such statements in particular where the claims for 
which a positive conclusion is reached have not yet been commented on. 
Concerning making suggestions on how to overcome objections, 
see B-XI, 3.8. When suggesting an acceptable form of amendment to the 
claims, the examining division will also invite the applicant to adapt the 
description to bring it into line with the amended claims (see F-IV, 4.3). 
4.2 Invitation to file comments and amendments 
The communication should include an invitation to the applicant to file 
observations, correct any deficiencies and, if necessary, submit 
amendments to the description, claims and drawings. It must also state the 
period within which the applicant must reply. Failure to reply in due time will 
Rule 71(2) 
Rule 71(1) and (2) 
Art. 94(3) and (4) 
Part C – Chapter III-14 

 
cause the application to be deemed withdrawn (see C-VI, 1 and E-VIII, 1). 
Further processing is available for this loss of rights (E-VIII, 2). 
5. 
Summons to oral proceedings as the first action in examination 
In exceptional cases, the examining division may decide to issue a 
summons to oral proceedings as the first action in examination. It may do 
so only if: 
– 
in its opinion, there is no prospect of a grant, even taking into 
account the applicant's reply to the search opinion 
– 
the content of the claims on file is not different in substance from that 
of the claims that served as a basis for the search 
– 
one or more of the objections raised in the search opinion and crucial 
to the outcome of the examination procedure still apply. 
In addition, in examination of a divisional application, the examining division 
may exceptionally issue a summons to oral proceedings as the first action 
if: 
– 
the parent application was refused or withdrawn and there is no 
prospect of a grant for the divisional application, even taking into 
account the applicant's reply to the search opinion 
– 
the content of the claims on file is substantially the same as or 
broader than the subject-matter of claims that were examined for the 
refused or withdrawn parent application or that served as a basis for 
the search of the divisional application  
– 
one or more of the objections that are crucial to the outcome of the 
examination procedure and that were raised in either the search 
opinion established for the divisional application, the parent's refusal 
or a communication issued for the withdrawn parent still apply. 
The annex to the summons issued as the first action in examination must 
deal with the applicant's requests in their entirety and be as detailed as a 
communication under Art. 94(3) (see, in particular, C-III, 4.1). It must not 
include any new objections or cite new documents that were neither 
included in the search opinion nor, in the case of a divisional application, in 
the refusal of the parent application or in a communication issued for the 
withdrawn parent application. All objections to the application must be 
covered and substantiated by giving the essential legal and factual 
reasons. In addition, it must include the reasons for the decision to directly 
summon to oral proceedings as the first action in examination. The division 
may inform the applicant in a telephone call if it is considering issuing a 
summons to oral proceedings as the first action in examination (C-VII, 2.5). 
In order to allow the applicant sufficient time to prepare any submissions 
ahead of the oral proceedings, the summons should be issued with at least 
six months' notice. 
 

Part C – Chapter III-15 
In accordance with the principles applicable to the summons to oral 
proceedings, applicants may avail themselves of the possibility to submit 
any arguments and amendments by expiry of the deadline set under 
Rule 116(1). Requests filed after the date set under Rule 116(1) are not to 
be treated as late-filed (H-II, 2.7) in the case of a summons to oral 
proceedings issued as first action in examination. 
Should the applicant's submissions contain a genuine effort to overcome 
the examining division's objections, oral proceedings may be cancelled or 
postponed. Otherwise, a decision on the substance of the application will in 
principle be taken during the oral proceedings, even if the applicant does 
not attend them (see E-III, 6 and E-III, 8.3.3.3). 
6. Requesting information on prior art (not confined to priority) 
The EPO may invite the applicant to submit, within a period of two months, 
information on prior art taken into consideration in national or regional 
patent proceedings and concerning an invention to which the European 
patent application relates. This in particular encompasses search results 
with respect to applications for patents or utility models whose priority is not 
being claimed. The EPO may by the same means request the copy of the 
search results on the priority or priorities referred to in Rule 141(1), where 
those results were not available to the applicant when requested under 
Rule 70b(1) (see the notice from the EPO dated 28 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 410). Failure by the applicant to comply with this invitation 
results in the application being deemed withdrawn under Art. 124(2). 
Further processing is available for this loss of rights (see E-VIII, 2). 
Given the considerable work such invitations can entail for applicants, 
further requests under Rule 141(3) will be issued only in individual cases 
where there are cogent reasons to suspect the existence of additional, 
relevant prior art. 
This invitation is an independent communication and the above-mentioned 
time limit is non-extendable. The invitation can be sent by itself or at the 
same time as an Art. 94(3) communication. If sent at the same time, the 
time limits set in both communications are independent of one another. Any 
information on prior art provided by the applicant will be included in the file 
and will be open to file inspection (see A-XI). 
7. Evaluation of prior-art documents cited in the search report and 
late priority claim 
As explained in A-III, 6.5.1 and A-III, 6.5.2, the applicant has the right to 
correct or introduce a priority claim within 16 months of the earliest priority 
(with a minimum of four months from the European filing date in the case of 
corrections). If this happens before finalisation of the search report, the 
examiner may review the draft search report to take into account the 
change in the application's effective date. In cases where the search report 
was issued on the basis of the original priority status (i.e. addition or 
correction of a priority claim is effected after the search report is drawn up), 
the examiner at the substantive examination stage should reevaluate the 
relevance of the documents cited in the search report. Where it appears 
that the prior art available to the examiner is unlikely to reflect the state of 
Art. 124 
Rule 141(3) 
Part C – Chapter III-16 

 
the art in a sufficiently complete way for the purpose of a patentability 
assessment, the examiner should then conduct an additional search (see 
C-IV, 7.3). No further search report will be issued in these cases: the 
applicant will be informed of any newly found documents in a 
communication under Art. 94(3) (with copies of such documents annexed to 
that communication). 
 

Part C – Chapter IV-1 
Chapter IV – Examination of replies and further 
stages of examination 
1. General procedure 
Following the applicant's reply to the search opinion (see B-XI, 8), WO-ISA, 
IPER or supplementary international search report prepared by the EPO 
(see E-IX, 3) or to the first communication, the examiner must examine the 
application, taking into account observations or amendments made by the 
applicant. 
Where the application is one of those mentioned in H-III, 2.1.4, Rule 137(4) 
requires that any amendments made by the applicant in reply to the search 
opinion, WO-ISA, IPER or supplementary international search report be 
identified and their basis in the application as filed indicated. Failure to do 
so may result in the examining division sending a communication under 
Rule 137(4). For more details of the procedure, see H-III, 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. 
In the case of one or more auxiliary requests directed to alternative texts for 
grant of a patent, every such request qualifies as a text submitted or agreed 
by the applicant within the meaning of Art. 113(2) and therefore must be 
dealt with in the order indicated or agreed to by the applicant, up to and 
including the highest-ranking allowable request, if any (see also H-III, 3 and 
C-V, 1.1). For the types of application mentioned in H-III, 2.1.4, Rule 137(4) 
must also be complied with in respect of auxiliary requests, which may also 
be subject to a communication under Rule 137(4). 
2. Extent of examination of replies 
After the first examination stage, provided that the: 
– 
search opinion 
– 
WO-ISA (when prepared by the EPO) 
– 
explanation accompanying the supplementary international search 
report under Rule 45bis.7(e) PCT (when prepared by the EPO, see 
the notice from the EPO dated 24 March 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 316, 
point 6) 
– 
IPER (when prepared by the EPO) 
– 
first communication (see B-XI, 1.1 and 8) 
was comprehensive and clear (see B-XI, 3 and C-III, 4 and 4.1), the 
examiner will not normally need to completely re-read the application but 
rather should concentrate on the amendments themselves, the related 
passages and the deficiencies previously noted. 
Part C – Chapter IV-2 

 
3. 
Further action upon examination of replies 
Examiners should be guided at this stage by the overriding principle that a 
final position (grant or refusal) should be reached in as few actions as 
possible, and should conduct the procedure with this always in mind. The 
EPC provides that the process of communicating with the applicant 
described in C-III, 4 is repeated "as often as necessary". 
In most cases, the applicant will have tried to deal with all the examiner's 
objections. A letter of reply from the applicant does not have to be 
substantively complete or cogent to qualify as a reply within the meaning of 
Art. 94(4). For the application not to be deemed withdrawn, it is enough for 
the applicant to comment on, even incompletely, or to file amendments in 
reply to at least one of the objections raised in the Art. 94(3) 
communication. In contrast, purely formal requests, such as for extension 
of the time limit under Art. 94(3) or for a consultation, do not qualify as 
replies under Art. 94(4) (see also B-XI, 8 and E-VIII, 2). A request for a 
decision according to the state of the file (see C-V, 15), however, qualifies 
as a reply within the meaning of Art. 94(4). 
If the only outstanding objection is the need to amend the description, see 
C-VI, 1.1. 
If examination of the applicant's reply shows that despite their submissions 
objections persist, and provided that at least one communication has been 
sent in examination proceedings (see C-III, 4 and E-IX, 4.1) and the 
applicant has been given the right to be heard (Art. 113(1)), i.e. the decision 
is based solely on grounds they have had an opportunity to comment on, 
the examiner will consider recommending to the other members of the 
examining division that the application be refused (see T 201/98). However, 
where there is a reasonable prospect that an additional invitation to 
overcome the objections could lead to a grant, the examiner will send a 
further written communication or contact the applicant by telephone. The 
examiner may also make suggestions on how to overcome the raised 
objections (see B-XI, 3.8 and C-III, 4.1.2). 
If examination of the applicant's reply shows that they have not dealt with 
all the main objections in their reply, it may be appropriate to draw the 
deficiencies to their attention, e.g. by telephone. But if no positive reaction 
is to be expected, the examiner should consider recommending to the other 
members of the examining division that the application be refused 
immediately (again provided that at least one communication has been sent 
in examination proceedings). 
If substantial differences of opinion exist, the issues are generally best dealt 
with in writing. If, however, there seems to be confusion about points in 
dispute, e.g. the applicant seems to have misunderstood the examiner's 
arguments or the applicant's own arguments are unclear, then a 
consultation may be useful. A consultation may also expedite the procedure 
if the matters to be resolved are minor. Consultations do not constitute oral 
proceedings (see E-III) and are more fully considered in C-VII, 2. 
Art. 94(3) 
Art. 113(1) 
 

Part C – Chapter IV-3 
3.1 Further action where a request for a translation of the priority 
application was sent earlier in examination proceedings 
In cases where an invitation under Rule 53(3) to file a translation of one or 
more priority applications was sent earlier in examination proceedings 
(either separately or at the same time as an Art. 94(3) communication – see 
A-III, 6.8.2), a subsequent communication (under Art. 94(3) or Rule 71(3) or 
a summons to oral proceedings) cannot be sent until the translation is filed 
or the period for further processing has expired (see also C-VIII, 5.1). This 
also applies in cases where the Rule 53(3) invitation was sent at the same 
time as a previous Art. 94(3) communication and the applicant has already 
replied to that communication (e.g. by filing amendments) but not yet 
provided the translation and the original time limit or the period for further 
processing is still running. 
4. Later stages of examination 
The considerations explained in C-IV, 3 also apply to later stages of 
examination given that, having regard to the principle stated in C-IV, 3, the 
greater the number of actions performed, the more likely it is that the most 
appropriate course of action is to refer the application to the other members 
of the examining division for a decision. Where this decision is to refuse the 
application, particular care should be taken to ensure that the decision does 
not offend against Art. 113(1). 
5. Examination of amendments 
Amendments must satisfy the conditions listed in C-III, 2. When they were 
effected must also be established. 
6. Admissibility of amendments made by the applicant 
For matters relating to the admissibility of amendments made in 
examination proceedings, see H-II, 2. 
7. Search-related issues in examination 
7.1 Search for conflicting European patent applications 
The examiner should make a search for any additional conflicting European 
patent applications falling within the area defined by Art. 54(3) unless this 
was already covered by the search report. 
This is because, in general, the search files will not be complete in respect 
of such material at the time of the main search. Since priority dates claimed 
(if any) may not be accorded to all or part of the application but may be 
accorded to the appropriate part of a conflicting application (see F-VI, 2.1), 
this search should be extended to cover all European patent applications 
published up to eighteen months after the filing of the application under 
consideration. 
If the examiner is unable to complete this top-up search when preparing the 
search opinion or the first communication under Art. 94(3), they should 
ensure that it is completed before the application is reported to be in order 
for the grant of a patent. In the rare cases where the application is found to 
be in order before this search can be completed (e.g. due to a request for 
accelerated prosecution of an application not claiming priority, "PACE", see 
Rule 53(3) 
Rule 137(2) and (3) 
Part C – Chapter IV-4 

 
the notice from the EPO dated 30 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A93), 
the grant of a patent should be postponed until the top-up search can be 
completed. 
If the top-up search is performed at the earliest 18 months from the filing 
date of the application under examination, the priority situation needs to be 
checked only if intermediate documents and/or conflicting applications are 
retrieved. 
The top-up search may exceptionally be performed at the earliest 18 
months after the priority date on condition that the priority claim is valid for 
the whole content of the patent application under examination. 
In addition to retrieving Art. 54(3) documents not available at the time of the 
original search, the top-up search takes into consideration potentially 
relevant prior art cited by other patent offices on applications belonging to 
the same patent family as the application under examination at the EPO 
and therefore needs to be performed for any file at the start and end of 
examination. 
The examiner may retrieve relevant intermediate and/or conflicting Euro-
PCT applications for which it is not yet clear if they will become prior art 
under Art. 54(3) alone or in conjunction with Rule 165 (see G-IV, 5.2). In 
these cases, the examining division cannot issue an intention to grant 
before it can be established if these documents are prior art under 
Art. 54(3). The examiner will first check if the Euro-PCT application has 
entered the European phase at 31 months after the earliest priority date of 
the application. If not, it may still constitute conflicting prior art under 
Art. 54(3) if the PCT applicant has paid the required filing fee under 
Rule 159(1)(c) and has supplied the PCT application in any official EPO 
language. The examiner will then verify if the application has become prior 
art under Art. 54(3) in conjunction with Rule 165. Since August 2021, the 
EPO publishes these cases in section I.2(2) of the European Patent Bulletin 
under the heading "International applications considered as comprised in 
the state of the art under Rule 165 and Art. 54(3) EPC". 
For the refund of examination fees (see A-VI, 2.5), the launch of a top-up 
search is triggered at the start of examination. This creates a marker that 
serves as evidence in the file that the examining division has started its 
substantive work. 
7.2 National prior rights 
In view of the importance of national prior rights (see B-VI, 4.2) for 
applicants in proceedings before the Unified Patent Court, the examiner 
expands the top-up search scope at the grant stage (see C-IV, 7.1) to 
include national applications and patents of all contracting states in so far 
as they are present in the EPO's databases. 
The division informs the applicant about the outcome of the top-up search 
for national prior rights. Those that appear prima facie relevant for the 
application are communicated to the applicant. 
 

Part C – Chapter IV-5 
7.3 Additional searches during examination 
An additional search will sometimes be required either at the first stage of 
amendment or subsequently. This may arise for a number of reasons. 
An additional search may be necessary: 
(i) 
where a partial search taking the place of the search report under 
Rule 63 has been issued at the search stage after an invitation under 
Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3, 3.1 and 3.2) and the deficiencies rendering 
a meaningful search impossible under Rule 63 have been 
subsequently corrected by amendment complying with Rule 137(5) 
(see H-IV, 4.1.1) or successfully refuted by the applicant 
(ii) 
where a declaration that a meaningful search was not possible took 
the place of the search report under Rule 63 and the applicant 
successfully refuted the objections 
(iii) 
where the applicant successfully argues that a plurality of 
independent claims in the same category, which led to a limitation of 
the search report in accordance with Rule 62a (see B-VIII, 4.1 and 
4.2), is in fact allowable according to the exceptions provided for in 
Rule 43(2) (see F-IV, 3.2) 
(iv) 
where a particular part of the application has not been searched 
because of an objection of lack of unity of invention and the 
arguments advanced by the applicant have convinced the examining 
division that unity is given 
(v) 
where the claims have been so amended that their scope is no 
longer covered by the original search 
(vi) 
where a search report under Rule 61 was issued containing no 
prior-art documents because the technical features were considered 
notorious (see B-VIII, 2.2.1) and the examining division does not 
share this opinion 
(vii) 
where no prior-art document was cited for features that were 
considered part of the common general knowledge and the 
examining division does not share this opinion or the common 
general knowledge is challenged by the applicant (see G-VII, 2 and 
3.1) 
(viii) exceptionally, where the applicant states that a mistake was made in 
the acknowledgement of prior art (see G-VII, 5.1) or the examiner 
believes that material relevant to obviousness might be found in 
technical fields not taken into account during the search 
(ix) 
where the applicant has introduced a new priority claim after the filing 
date (see C-III, 6). 
If the application was filed under the PCT, the search report will be the 
international search report issued under the PCT and will be accompanied 
Art. 153(6) and (7) 
Part C – Chapter IV-6 

 
by a supplementary European search report unless the Administrative 
Council decides that that is to be dispensed with (see E-IX, 3.2). Both of 
these reports will have to be considered by the examiner when deciding 
whether any additional search is required. 
In the case of a Euro-PCT application for which the EPO acting as ISA or 
SISA issued an incomplete search report or a declaration of no search (see 
PCT-EPO Guidelines, B-VIII, 1), an additional search may be necessary if 
the deficiencies underlying the limitation of the search have been corrected 
by amendment or successfully refuted by the applicant (see B-II, 4.2 (ii)). 
Otherwise, the examining division will object to claims relating to subject-
matter not searched by the EPO acting as ISA, referring to the EPC 
provision invoked for the limitation of the search, e.g. Art. 84. Rule 137(5), 
second sentence, cannot be invoked in that context. 
For searches under Rule 164(2), see C-III, 3.1. 
7.4 Search at the examination stage 
Although all search work (other than for Art. 54(3) material) should as a rule 
be done at the search stage, in exceptional circumstances examiners are 
not barred from looking for a relevant document whose existence they 
know of or have reason to suspect, provided they can retrieve that 
document in a short time. 
7.5 Citing documents not mentioned in the search report 
A copy of any document cited by the examiner but not mentioned in the 
search report, for example one found in a search under C-IV, 7.1, C-IV, 7.2 
or C-IV, 7.3, should be sent to the applicant and identified in the electronic 
dossier (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, 
Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, J.2). 
8. 
New submissions in reply to a summons 
New requests filed in reply to a summons to oral proceedings will normally 
be discussed at the oral proceedings. As a rule, there is no provision for 
detailed discussion before the oral proceedings. 
However, informal consultation to discuss the new requests may be 
allowed by the first member (see C-VII, 2), in particular if there is a 
reasonable prospect that the consultation could lead to an agreed allowable 
claim set. 
The examining division strives to review newly filed requests in good time 
before oral proceedings so the proceedings can be cancelled if necessary, 
in particular where a newly filed main request is considered patentable. 
For cases where the newly filed main request is not considered patentable 
but one of the auxiliary requests is, see E-X, 2.9. 
 

Part C – Chapter V-1 
Chapter V – The final stage of examination 
1. Communication under Rule 71(3) 
1.1 Text for approval 
Once the examining division decides that a patent can be granted, it must 
inform the applicant of the text it intends to use for the grant. This text may 
include amendments and corrections that the examining division made on 
its own initiative and can reasonably expect the applicant to accept. If in 
doubt as to whether the applicant will agree to the proposed amendments, 
the examining division should contact them by telephone or via an official 
communication. The applicant's agreement to such amendments during a 
consultation will usually be recorded in the communication under 
Rule 71(3) (see C-VII, 2.4). 
Examples of amendments not requiring consultation with the applicant: 
(a) 
amendment of a statement of invention in the description to bring it 
into conformity with the claims 
(b) 
deletion 
of 
vague 
general 
statements 
in 
the 
description 
(see F-IV, 4.4) or of obviously irrelevant matter (see F-II, 7.4) 
(c) 
insertion of values in SI units (see F-II, 4.13) 
(d) 
insertion of reference numerals in claims unless the applicant is 
known to object to this or has previously objected to this 
(e) 
introduction of a summary of background art that clearly represents 
the prior art closest to the invention (see F-II, 4.3) 
(f) 
amendments that, despite changing the meaning or scope of an 
independent claim, are very clearly necessary and so assumed 
acceptable to the applicant (see for example G-VI, 6.1.2, G-VI, 6.1.3 
and G-VI, 6.1.4) 
(g) 
correction of linguistic and other minor errors 
(h) 
reformulation of method-of-treatment claims into an allowable format 
(see G-II, 4.2). 
(i) 
deletion of redundant claims (e.g. omnibus claims and claims that the 
applicant has not deleted despite having incorporated their features 
into other claims). 
Examples of amendments that may not be proposed without consulting the 
applicant: 
(i) 
amendments that significantly change the meaning or scope of a 
claim when there are several different ways to amend it and the 
examiner cannot predict which amendment the applicant will agree to 
Rule 71(3) 
Part C – Chapter V-2 

 
(ii) 
deletion of entire claims, with the exception of so-called "omnibus 
claims" (i.e. claims reading "An apparatus substantially as described 
herein", or the like) 
(iii) 
combining of claims to overcome a novelty or inventive step 
objection. 
The above list is designed to avoid changes likely to be rejected by the 
applicant and thus to help avoid delays in the conclusion of examination 
proceedings. For the standard marks used by the division to indicate 
amendments and corrections using the in-house electronic tool, see 
C-V, Annex. 
The text is communicated to the applicant via a Rule 71(3) communication, 
which includes an invitation to pay the fee for grant and publishing 
(see C-V, 1.2) and to file a translation of the claims in the two official EPO 
languages other than the language of the proceedings (see C-V, 1.3) within 
a non-extendable period of four months. If the applicant pays the fees and 
files the translations in time (and files or requests no corrections or 
amendments to the text proposed in the Rule 71(3) communication, 
see C-V, 4.1), they will be deemed to have approved the text intended for 
grant (Rule 71(5)). 
If, during examination proceedings, a main request and auxiliary requests 
have been filed (see C-IV, 1 and E-X, 2.9) and one of the requests is 
allowable, the communication pursuant to Rule 71(3) is to be issued on the 
basis of the (first) allowable request unless there is a higher ranking 
request for oral proceedings (see E-X, 2.2). The communication pursuant to 
Rule 71(3) must briefly indicate the essential reasons for the non-
allowability of the subject-matter of the higher-ranking requests or their 
inadmissibility (see also H-III, 3). The examining division should provide 
sufficient information about the objections raised to enable the applicant to 
comment on them. 
Handwritten amendments by the applicant to the description, claims and 
abstract, unless they involve graphic symbols and characters and chemical 
or mathematical formulae, are no longer accepted in strict compliance with 
Rule 50(1) in conjunction with Rule 49(2) (Art. 2(7) of the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113) (see 
OJ EPO 2013, 603, and A-III, 3.2). For the procedure to follow in oral 
proceedings, see E-III, 8.7. 
1.2 Grant and publishing fee 
The communication under Rule 71(3) also invites the applicant to pay the 
fee for grant and publishing within a non-extendable four-month period. For 
European patent applications filed before 1 April 2009 and international 
applications entering the regional phase before that date, the fee for grant 
and printing may include an element depending on the number of pages, 
but for applications filed or entering the regional phase on or after that date, 
this additional element is payable as part of the filing fee (see A-III, 13.2). 
 

Part C – Chapter V-3 
1.3 Translations of the claims 
The communication under Rule 71(3) also invites the applicant to file a 
translation of the claims in the two official EPO languages other than the 
language of the proceedings within a non-extendable four-month period. 
If the application contains different sets of claims for particular contracting 
states (see H-III, 4), a translation of all the sets of claims must be filed. 
Only one copy of the translation needs to be filed. 
Examiners should not concern themselves with the quality of the translation 
filed. 
The translation should meet the requirements pursuant to Rule 50(1). 
1.4 Claims fees due in response to Rule 71(3) communication 
If the text of the European patent application serving as the basis for grant 
contains more than fifteen claims, the examining division requests the 
applicant to pay, within the period under Rule 71(3), claims fees in respect 
of each claim in excess of that number unless they have already done so 
under Rule 45(1) or Rule 162(1) and (2) (see A-III, 9). Where there is more 
than one set of claims, fees are incurred under Rule 45(1), Rule 162(1) and 
(2), or Rule 71(4) only for the set with the highest number of claims. 
If the text on which the Rule 71(3) communication is based contains fewer 
claims than the set in respect of which claims fees were paid on filing under 
Rule 45 or on entry into the European phase under Rule 162, no refund of 
claims fees will be made. 
Where the communication under Rule 71(3) is based on an auxiliary 
request, the number of claims in the request determines the claims fees 
due in response to the communication. However, if the applicant replies by 
requesting a grant based on a higher-ranking request, no claims fees need 
to be paid in response to the communication (see C-V, 4.1). 
1.5 Other information in the communication under Rule 71(3) 
An annex to the Rule 71(3) communication indicates the contracting states 
validly designated as well as the extension and validation states for which 
the corresponding fees have been paid, the title of the invention in the three 
official languages, the international patent classification, the application's 
filing date, any priorities claimed, the designated inventors and the 
applicant's registered name. 
The Rule 71(3) communication also states that, where a renewal fee falls 
due between the communication's notification and the proposed date of the 
mention of the grant's publication, publication will be effected only after the 
renewal fee and any additional fee have been paid (see C-V, 2). 
Where the examining division changes its opinion after an earlier negative 
communication, it will communicate its reasons for this unless they are 
clear from the applicant's reply, from a communication or from the minutes 
of a consultation. 
Rule 50(1) 
Rule 71(4) 
Rule 45(1) 
Rule 162(1) and (2) 
Part C – Chapter V-4 

 
During the grant procedure an applicant may submit further technical 
information, for example: 
– 
comparative tests 
– 
further examples 
– 
statements concerning the effects and/or advantages of the 
invention. 
Technical information extending beyond the content of the application as 
filed, however, cannot be included in the application by way of amendment 
(Art. 123(2), H-IV and H-V). Such information is added to the file, which is 
open to inspection (Art. 128(4)), and its existence is indicated on the cover 
page of the patent specification. 
All further documents that were neither cited in the application as filed nor 
mentioned in the search report but that were cited during the examination 
procedure are to be indicated, even if they have not been used in an 
objection concerning novelty or inventive step. This also applies to 
documents cited to show, for instance, a technical prejudice. 
2. 
Approval of the proposed text – grant of a patent 
If an applicant pays the fee for grant and publishing along with any claims 
fees due under Rule 71(4) and files the translation of the claims within the 
specified period (and files or requests no corrections or amendments to the 
text proposed for grant in the Rule 71(3) communication, see C-V, 4.1), 
they are deemed to have approved the text intended for grant. 
The above also applies where the Rule 71(3) communication was based on 
an auxiliary request, provided that the applicant does not reply to the 
Rule 71(3) communication by requesting that a grant be based on a higher-
ranking request. This means that, in the absence of any indication to the 
contrary, the above acts imply approval of the auxiliary request text upon 
which the Rule 71(3) communication was based as well as the 
abandonment of all higher-ranking requests. 
The above also applies where the Rule 71(3) communication included the 
examining division's proposals for amendments or corrections to the text 
intended for grant (see C-V, 1.1). Consequently, provided the applicant 
does not reject these proposals in their reply, completion of the above acts 
constitutes approval of the text amended or corrected by the examining 
division. 
Once all the requirements set out in C-V, 1.1 to 1.4, are met, the decision to 
grant the European patent is issued, provided that renewal fees and any 
additional fees already due have been paid. 
If a renewal fee falls due after the Rule 71(3) communication's notification 
but before the next possible date for publication of the mention of the 
European patent's grant, the decision to grant is not issued and the mention 
of the grant is not published until the renewal fee has been paid. The 
Rule 71(5) 
Art. 97(1) 
Rule 71a(1) 
Rule 71a(4) 
Art. 86(1) 
 

Part C – Chapter V-5 
applicant is informed accordingly. If the renewal fee or any additional fee is 
not paid in time, the application is deemed withdrawn (see A-X, 5.2.4). 
In rare cases where examination was accelerated to such an extent that the 
Rule 71(3) communication is issued before the designation fee falls due, 
the decision to grant will not be issued and the mention of the grant will not 
be published until the designation fee has been paid. The applicant is 
informed accordingly. For European patent applications filed before 
1 April 2009 or international applications entering the regional phase before 
that date, publication will not take place until the designation fees have 
been paid and the designation of states for which no designation fees have 
been paid has been withdrawn (see also A-III, 11.1 and 11.3). 
The decision to grant does not take effect until the date on which the grant 
is mentioned in the European Patent Bulletin. 
2.1 Request for unitary effect 
Requests for unitary effect must be filed with the EPO no later than one 
month after the mention of the European patent's grant is published in the 
European Patent Bulletin (Rule 6 of the Rules relating to Unitary Patent 
Protection). To offer flexibility, users can file requests after the decision to 
grant the European patent is issued (EPO Form 2006A), see 
Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2023. Requests for unitary effect 
filed early will not be processed by the EPO before the date on which the 
mention of the European patent's grant is published in the European Patent 
Bulletin and will appear in the Register for unitary patent protection only 
from that date. 
3. No reply in time – application deemed withdrawn 
If the applicant fails to pay the fee for grant and publishing or the claims 
fees or to file the translation within the period under Rule 71(3), the 
application is deemed withdrawn unless, within the same period, the 
applicant files or requests corrections or amendments to the text proposed 
for grant in the Rule 71(3) communication (see C-V, 4.1). 
If the applicant fails to meet the time limit under Rule 71(3), further 
processing may be requested under Art. 121 (see E-VIII, 2). In such a case, 
the omitted act to be completed would be either: 
(i) 
all of the following acts referred to in Rule 71(3) and Rule 71(4): 
(a) 
payment of the fee for grant and publishing 
(b) 
payment of any claims fees due  
(c) 
filing of the translations of the claims; or 
(ii) 
one or more of the following acts: 
(a) 
filing amendments and/or corrections to the application 
documents 
Rule 71a(3) 
Art. 97(3) 
Rule 71(7) 
Art. 121 
Part C – Chapter V-6 

 
(b) 
rejecting amendments proposed by the examining division in 
the Rule 71(3) communication 
(c) 
requesting the grant to be based on a higher-ranking request 
than 
the 
auxiliary 
request 
on 
which 
the 
Rule 71(3) 
communication was based. 
4. 
Request for amendments or corrections in reply to the Rule 71(3) 
communication 
If the applicant, within the period under Rule 71(3), requests reasoned 
amendments or corrections to the communicated text (see C-V, 4.3 for the 
reasoning required), the examining division will issue a new Rule 71(3) 
communication if it gives its consent (i.e. if it finds the amendments 
admissible and allowable; see C-V, 4.6); otherwise it will resume the 
examination proceedings (see C-V, 4.7). This also applies in the following 
cases: 
– 
if the applicant requests the reversal of amendments proposed by the 
examining division in the Rule 71(3) communication (see C-V, 4.6.1) 
– 
if the Rule 71(3) communication was based on an auxiliary request 
and the applicant replies by requesting that a grant be based on a 
higher-ranking request (see C-V, 4.6.2 and 4.7.1.1). 
In this and sections C-V, 4.1 to 4.10, unless otherwise stated, the terms 
"amendments" and "corrections" refer only to amendments or corrections of 
the application documents and not of other documents (e.g. bibliographic 
data, the designation of the inventor, etc.). 
4.1 No payment of fees or filing of translations necessary 
In the case referred to in C-V, 4, the applicant will not be required to pay 
the fee for grant and publishing or any claims fees in reply to the first 
Rule 71(3) communication, nor will they be required to file any translations 
of the claims within the relevant period. This applies irrespective of whether 
the examining division subsequently finds these amendments or 
corrections to be admissible and allowable and whether the amendments or 
corrections are reasoned (see C-V, 4.3). 
This also applies if the applicant requests the reversal of amendments 
proposed by the examining division in the Rule 71(3) communication 
(see C-V, 1.1). And it applies if the Rule 71(3) communication was based 
on an auxiliary request and the applicant replies by requesting that a grant 
be based on a higher-ranking request. 
4.2 Crediting of fees paid voluntarily 
Although the applicant is not required to pay fees in response to the 
Rule 71(3) communication when requesting amendments or corrections in 
their reply (see C-V, 4.1), they can do so voluntarily. In that case, the 
amount of the fees paid will be credited to the payment of the same fees in 
response to a subsequent Rule 71(3) communication (issued either directly 
or after resumption of examination – see C-V, 4.6 and 4.7.2 respectively). 
Rule 71(6) 
 

Part C – Chapter V-7 
This crediting will be dealt with according to the procedures explained in 
A-X, 11. This is subject to the following: if the amount of the claims fees 
due in response to the second Rule 71(3) communication is less than the 
amount voluntarily paid in response to the first Rule 71(3) communication, a 
refund will be made of the excess paid since the higher claims fees were 
not due when paid in response to the first Rule 71(3) communication. 
If, after such voluntary payment, the application is withdrawn, deemed 
withdrawn or refused, a refund of the voluntarily paid fee for grant and 
publishing will be possible under the conditions explained in A-X, 10.2.5. 
Furthermore, since the claims fees were paid when they were not due, they 
will also be refunded under the same conditions. 
4.3 Amendments or corrections should be reasoned 
The reasoning accompanying amendments or corrections filed in response 
to the Rule 71(3) communication should indicate respectively: 
– 
why the applicant considers that the amended application documents 
comply with the EPC, in particular the patentability requirements, 
Art. 123(2) and Art. 84 
– 
why the applicant considers that the errors and their proposed 
corrections are evident according to Rule 139. 
If, within the period under Rule 71(3), the applicant files amendments or 
corrections that are not reasoned, no payment of the fee for grant and 
publishing or claims fees is necessary, nor is the filing of translations 
(see C-V, 4.1). However, the absence of any reasoning means that such 
amendments or corrections are more likely to result in a resumption of the 
examination procedure (see C-V, 4.7). 
4.4 Admissibility of amendments 
The criteria for assessing the admissibility of amendments are dealt with in 
detail in H-II, 2.5 and subsections. 
By way of exception, in cases where the Rule 71(3) communication was 
also the first communication in examination proceedings, amendments filed 
in response must be admitted into the proceedings under Rule 137 in 
cases (i) to (iii) mentioned in H-II, 2.2. However, where a further Rule 71(3) 
communication is sent in respect of such cases (see C-V, 4.6 and 4.7.2), 
any amendments filed in response must be consented to by the examining 
division according to Rule 137(3) (see H-II, 2.5). 
4.5 Adaptation of the description 
If the amendments or corrections filed by the applicant in the Rule 71(3) 
period concern the claims, the applicant should consider the need to adapt 
the description. To avoid potential delays in cases where adaptation is 
necessary, the applicant should provide an adapted description when filing 
amended claims in the Rule 71(3) period. 
If no such adapted description is filed, the examining division may adapt the 
description by itself and propose these amendments in the second 
Rule 137(3) 
Part C – Chapter V-8 

 
Rule 71(3) communication (see C-V, 4.6.3). Alternatively, it may resume 
examination (see C-V, 4.7) and send the applicant a communication under 
Art. 94(3) requesting the adapted description before issuing a second 
Rule 71(3) communication (see C-V, 4.7.2). 
4.6 Amendments/corrections admitted and allowable – second 
Rule 71(3) communication sent 
If the amendments and/or corrections filed within the period under 
Rule 71(3) are admitted under Rule 137(3) and also comply with the EPC, 
the examining division will send a second communication under Rule 71(3) 
based on them. 
4.6.1 Second Rule 71(3) communication reversing the amendments 
proposed by the examining division in first Rule 71(3) communication 
A second communication under Rule 71(3) is also sent if the applicant 
requests reversal of amendments proposed by the examining division in the 
first Rule 71(3) communication and the examining division overturns its 
previous opinion, finding that the amendments proposed earlier were not 
necessary, possibly as a consequence of arguments or evidence provided 
by the applicant in their reply to the first Rule 71(3) communication (in the 
absence of such convincing arguments or evidence, examination will 
normally be resumed; see C-V, 4.7). 
4.6.2 Second Rule 71(3) communication based on higher-ranking 
request initially rejected in first Rule 71(3) communication 
In cases where the first Rule 71(3) communication was based on an 
auxiliary request (see H-III, 3, in particular H-III, 3.1 and 3.3 and 
subsections), the first communication under Rule 71(3) would have been 
accompanied by an indication of why the examining division did not 
consider 
the 
higher-ranking 
requests 
admissible 
or 
allowable 
(see C-V, 1.1). If the applicant replies to this first Rule 71(3) communication 
indicating their wish to base a grant on one of those higher-ranking 
requests (see C-V, 1.1), that reply will normally lead to examination being 
resumed (see C-V, 4.7 and 4.7.1.1). The examining division may reverse its 
opinion, for example due to convincing arguments or evidence filed by the 
applicant with their reply to the first Rule 71(3) communication. If the 
applicant is successful in this regard, the examining division will send a 
second communication under Rule 71(3) based on the higher-ranking 
request. 
4.6.3 Examining division proposes amendments in second 
Rule 71(3) communication 
As with the first Rule 71(3) communication, the examining division may 
propose amendments to the applicant's latest request forming the basis for 
the second Rule 71(3) communication (this request includes amendments 
or corrections filed in response to the first Rule 71(3) communication). The 
types of amendment that may or may not be proposed by the examining 
division in the second Rule 71(3) communication are the same as those 
mentioned in C-V, 1.1. However, in the second Rule 71(3) communication, 
the examining division cannot repropose amendments already rejected by 
the applicant. Where the examining division considers that such an 
Rule 71(6) 
 

Part C – Chapter V-9 
amendment is necessary to overcome an objection, it should consider 
resuming examination (see C-V, 4.7). 
4.7 Amendments not admitted and/or not allowable, examination 
resumed 
The examining division may resume the examination proceedings at any 
time up to the decision to grant the European patent. 
4.7.1 Communications/oral proceedings/refusal after resumption 
If the examining division finds the amendments submitted by the applicant 
in reply to the Rule 71(3) communication either inadmissible or not 
allowable, it will resume the examination proceedings. 
The next action may be a communication under Art. 94(3) or a consultation 
with the applicant (see C-VII, 2). The examining division may also issue a 
summons to oral proceedings or, if the necessary requirements are met, 
refuse the application directly. 
The application may be refused directly if the following criteria are satisfied: 
(a) 
the grounds leading to the finding that the requests filed in response 
to the Rule 71(3) communication are inadmissible or not allowable 
have already been formally dealt with in examination proceedings 
(Art. 113(1)), for example in a communication under Art. 94(3) and 
Rule 71(1) and Rule 71(2) (see C-III, 4, E-X, 1.1); and 
(b) 
the applicant's right to oral proceedings on request has been 
respected (Art. 116(1)). 
If one of the following situations applies, the examining division will have to 
arrange for the holding of oral proceedings before issuing a decision to 
refuse (see C-V, 4.7.3): 
(i) 
oral proceedings have been requested but have not yet been held 
(ii) 
oral proceedings have been held, but: 
– 
the subject of the proceedings has changed such that a right 
to subsequent oral proceedings arises under Art. 116(1) 
(e.g. as a result of the amendments filed in response to the 
Rule 71(3) communication) and 
– 
the applicant has requested subsequent oral proceedings. 
Requests for oral proceedings must be allowed as long as proceedings 
before the EPO are still pending, i.e. until the decision to grant has been 
handed over to the internal post (see G 12/91 and T 556/95, especially 
reasons for the decision 4.4). 
4.7.1.1 Higher-ranking request not admissible and/or not allowable 
If the applicant replies to the Rule 71(3) communication by requesting that 
a grant be based on a higher-ranking request but the examining division is 
Rule 71a(2) 
Art. 94(3) 
Rule 71(1) and (2) 
Art. 97(2) 
Art. 116(1) 
Part C – Chapter V-10 

 
not convinced by the arguments and evidence filed with their reply, the 
examining division resumes examination following the procedure in 
C-V, 4.7.1. The examining division may also directly refuse the application 
providing a full reasoning under the proviso that: 
– 
the short indication of the essential reasons given in the Rule 71(3) 
communication for the non-allowability of the subject-matter of the 
higher-ranking requests or the inadmissibility of these requests (see 
C-V, 1.1 and C-V, 4.6.2) provides sufficient information about the 
objections raised by the examining division to enable the applicant to 
comment on them (such that the applicant is not taken by surprise, in 
particular where amendments or corrections have been filed together 
with their disagreement; see C-V, 4.7.1) and 
– 
the applicant's right to oral proceedings on request has been 
respected (Art. 116(1)) (see also H-III, 3.3.2). 
For the purposes of determining whether the reasons not to grant the 
higher-ranking requests given in the Rule 71(3) communication allow the 
division to issue a refusal, a general indication such as "Auxiliary request 3 
is not clear because an essential feature is missing" is not sufficient. 
Rather, a more detailed statement is needed to ensure that the applicant's 
right to be heard is properly respected. For example, the division may 
provide the applicant with an explanation such as: "Auxiliary request 3 is 
not inventive in view of D1 (see col. 5, lines 25-46; fig. 4) because the 
skilled person, wishing to avoid friction between the cable and the carpet, 
would make the clip recess deeper than the cable diameter". 
4.7.2 Agreement reached on a text - second Rule 71(3) 
communication 
If the resumption of examination described in C-V, 4.7.1 results in an 
allowable and admissible text being filed or in the applicant convincing the 
examining division that the text already filed in response to the Rule 71(3) 
communication is in fact admissible and allowable, a second Rule 71(3) 
communication is sent based on this agreed text. Such cases are dealt with 
in the same way as described in C-V, 4.6. 
4.7.3 No agreement reached on a text - refusal 
If no agreement can be reached on a text after examination is resumed, the 
application is refused (see C-V, 14). For details on conducting resumed 
examination proceedings before issuing such a decision, see C-V, 4.7.1. 
4.8 Fees to be paid within the second Rule 71(3) period 
Where the applicant files amendments or corrections in response to the first 
communication under Rule 71(3), they do not have to pay either the fee for 
grant and publishing or the claims fees (see C-V, 4.1). A second Rule 71(3) 
communication may then be issued either immediately (where the 
amended/corrected text is allowable, see C-V, 4.6) or after examination is 
resumed and an allowable text is agreed on (see C-V, 4.7.2). 
Rule 71(6) 
Art. 97(2) 
 

Part C – Chapter V-11 
4.8.1 Claims fees 
For the text on which the second Rule 71(3) communication is based to be 
deemed approved according to Rule 71(5), the applicant must pay any 
claims fees due in response to the communication, thus also avoiding 
deemed withdrawal of the application under Rule 71(7). For the calculation 
of claims fees due at this stage, see C-V, 1.4. 
Since no claims fees would normally have been paid in response to the first 
Rule 71(3) communication, the number of claims in the text on which this 
first communication was based plays no role in calculating the amount of 
the claims fees due in response to the second Rule 71(3) communication. 
However, in cases where the applicant paid the claims fees voluntarily in 
response to the first Rule 71(3) communication, the amount paid is credited 
according to Rule 71a(5) (see C-V, 4.2 and A-X, 11.2). 
4.8.2 Fee for grant and publishing 
For the text on which the second Rule 71(3) communication is based to be 
deemed approved according to Rule 71(5), the applicant must pay the fee 
for grant and publishing in response to the communication, thus also 
avoiding deemed withdrawal of the application under Rule 71(7). 
For European patent applications filed before 1 April 2009 or international 
applications entering the European phase before that date, the fee for grant 
and publishing incorporates a fee for each page of the application in excess 
of 35 (see C-V, 1.2 and A-III, 13.2). If the number of pages of such an 
application 
changes 
between 
the 
first 
and 
second 
Rule 71(3) 
communication, it is the number of pages on which the second Rule 71(3) 
communication is based that is used to calculate the fee amount. Where 
the applicant paid the fee voluntarily in response to the first Rule 71(3) 
communication, the amount paid will be credited according to Rule 71a(5) 
(see C-V, 4.2 and A-X, 11.1). 
4.9 Reply explicitly disapproving with the proposed text without 
indicating an alternative text 
If the applicant replies to the communication under Rule 71(3) by simply 
disapproving with the text proposed for grant, not indicating an alternative 
and not paying any fees or filing the translations of the claims, the following 
will apply: 
(1) 
If the text proposed for grant was based on the main request 
submitted by the applicant (without any amendments or corrections 
proposed by the examining division), the application will be refused, 
provided that the criteria in C-V, 4.7.1 are met. The basis for the 
refusal in this case is the absence of an application text agreed to by 
the applicant (Art. 113(2)). 
(2) 
If amendments or corrections were proposed by the division in the 
Rule 71(3) 
communication, 
the 
applicant's 
disagreement 
is 
interpreted as a rejection of the proposal and the procedure 
continues as described in C-V, 4.6.1. 
Art. 2(2), No 7.2 
RFees 
Part C – Chapter V-12 

 
(3) 
If the communication under Rule 71(3) was based on an auxiliary 
request, the applicant's disagreement is interpreted as a request to 
base the grant on a higher-ranking request. The procedure continues 
as described in C-V, 4.6.2 and 4.7.1.1. If it is not clear which higher-
ranking request the applicant wishes to pursue, the examining 
division must request clarification of this in resumed examination 
proceedings. 
If the applicant first files only their disagreement with the text and then (still 
within the Rule 71(3) period) a request for amendment or correction, this is 
interpreted as a desire to proceed with the application as amended or 
corrected. The procedure in C-V, 4 applies. 
4.10 Amendments/corrections filed in second Rule 71(3) period 
In cases where a second Rule 71(3) communication is sent (see C-V, 4.6 
and 4.7.2) and the applicant replies within the second Rule 71(3) period by 
doing one or more of the following, the procedures explained in C-V, 4.1 to 
4.9 apply mutatis mutandis: 
(i) 
filing further amendments or corrections 
(ii) 
rejecting amendments proposed by the examining division in the 
second Rule 71(3) communication 
(iii) 
reverting to a higher-ranking request (where the second Rule 71(3) 
communication is based on an auxiliary request). 
In particular, in such cases the applicant will be required neither to pay the 
fee for grant and publishing or any claims fees, nor to file translations of the 
claims within this second period under Rule 71(3). If the examining division 
agrees to a text (either with or without resumption of examination), a third 
communication under Rule 71(3) is then sent. 
Furthermore, 
if 
the 
applicant 
replies 
to 
the 
second 
Rule 71(3) 
communication by rejecting amendments proposed by the examining 
division in the first Rule 71(3) communication (where these have not been 
superseded), the procedures described in C-V, 4.1 to 4.9 likewise apply 
mutatis mutandis (no need to pay fees or file translations, etc.). 
In respect of repeated requests for amendments in response to the second 
or subsequent Rule 71(3) communication, the division may exercise its 
discretion under Rule 137(3) not to admit such amendments (H-II, 2.5.1). If 
the division intends not to admit the amendments, it will resume the 
examination proceedings, e.g. by summoning the applicant to oral 
proceedings. 
5. 
Further requests for amendment after approval 
The criteria for assessing the admissibility of such amendments are dealt 
with in detail in H-II, 2.6. The procedure for dealing with such late-filed 
amendments is explained in C-V, 6. 
Rule 137(3) 
 

Part C – Chapter V-13 
6. The examining division resumes examination after approval of the 
text 
6.1 When does the examining division resume examination after 
approval? 
Following the applicant's approval in response to the Rule 71(3) 
communication (see C-V, 2), the examining division may resume the 
examination procedure at any time up to the moment the decision to grant 
is handed over to the EPO's internal postal service for transmittal to the 
applicant (see G 12/91). This will seldom occur, but may be necessary if:  
– 
the applicant files further prior art necessitating further substantive 
examination  
– 
the examining division becomes aware of very relevant prior art 
following observations by third parties under Art. 115  
– 
the applicant files amendments or corrections (having already 
approved the text)  
– 
the examining division becomes aware in some other way of 
circumstances that cause the subject-matter claimed to fail to comply 
with the EPC. 
The resumption of examination after approval is subject to the same 
considerations as resumption due to amendments filed in the Rule 71(3) 
period (see C-V, 4.7.1). The next action issued after resumption of 
examination must however indicate that the proceedings have been 
resumed as well as the substantive reasons that led to the resumption. In 
particular, the applicant's right to comment (Art. 113(1)), the right to at least 
one communication under Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1) and (2) in examination 
proceedings (see C-III, 4) and the right to oral proceedings on request 
(Art. 116(1)) must be respected. 
The criteria applied in assessing the admissibility of amendments or 
corrections filed by the applicant after approval are dealt with in H-II, 2.6. 
6.2 A further communication under Rule 71(3) 
A second Rule 71(3) communication is issued if the resumed examination 
results in a text on the basis of which a patent can be granted (substantive 
amendments directed to resolving the issues which gave rise to the 
resumption of examination are possible). 
If the translations of the claims have already been filed (see C-V, 1.3) and 
the fees paid (see C-V, 1.2 and 1.4) in reply to a previous Rule 71(3) 
communication, e.g. in the case of resumption of examination after 
approval (see C-V, 6 and Rule 71(6)), the applicant must express 
agreement as to the text to be granted (Rule 71a(1)) within the 
non-extendable four-month period mentioned in the further Rule 71(3) 
communication (e.g. by approving the text and verifying the bibliographic 
data, by confirming that grant proceedings can continue based on the 
documents on file and/or by stating which translations of the claims already 
Rule 71a(2) 
Rule 137(3) 
Rule 71(6) 
Part C – Chapter V-14 

 
on file are to be used). This also applies if a further Rule 71(3) 
communication was sent. 
6.3 Crediting of fees under Rule 71a(5) 
If, in response to an invitation under Rule 71(3), the applicant has already 
paid the fee for grant and publishing or the claims fees, the amount paid will 
be credited if a further such invitation is issued. For more details, 
see A-X, 11. 
7. 
Correction of errors in the decision to grant 
Under certain circumstances, a decision to grant a European patent may be 
corrected. For more details, see H-VI, 3. 
8. 
Further processing 
If the applicant fails to meet the time limit under Rule 71(3), further 
processing may be requested under Art. 121 (see E-VIII, 2). The procedure 
to follow is explained in C-V, 3. 
9. 
Refund of the fee for grant and publishing 
If the application is refused, withdrawn prior to notification of the decision 
on the grant of a European patent or, at that time, deemed withdrawn, the 
fee for grant and publishing will be refunded (for more details, 
see A-X, 10.2.5). 
10. Publication of the patent specification 
The decision to grant contains the date of the mention of the European 
patent's grant and is sent to the applicant when the technical preparations 
for printing the patent specification have been completed. 
As soon as possible after the mention of the grant is published in the 
Bulletin, the EPO publishes the patent specification containing the 
description, claims (in the three official languages) and any drawings. The 
front page of the published specification shows, in particular, the 
contracting states still designated at the time of grant (or whose designation 
has been withdrawn after completion of the technical preparations for 
printing). Regarding the form in which the publication takes place, see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, Special edition 
No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, D.3. 
Mistakes in a European patent specification made during its production 
have no effect on the content of the patent granted. For this, only the text 
on which the decision to grant is based is decisive (see H-VI, 4). If 
necessary, the EPO may arrange for correction to be made public as soon 
as any mistake in a specification is discovered. This is done by means of a 
note in the European Patent Bulletin and publication of a corrigendum, the 
sole purpose being to bring the specification into line with the content of the 
decision to grant (see Rule 143(2) and the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 15 July 2014, OJ EPO 2014, A86, Art. 1(2)). 
11. Withdrawal before publication of the patent specification 
The European patent specification is not published if the application is 
withdrawn before termination of the technical preparations for publication. 
Rule 71a(5) 
Rule 71a(6) 
Art. 98 
Rule 73 
Art. 14(6) 
Rule 73 
 

Part C – Chapter V-15 
If, after termination of the technical preparations, the application is 
withdrawn to avoid publication, non-publication cannot be guaranteed. The 
EPO will, however, try (in accordance with the principles of J 5/81) to 
prevent publication on a case-by-case basis if the stage reached in the 
publication procedure permits this reasonably easily. The application may 
be withdrawn by means of a signed declaration, which should be 
unqualified and unambiguous (see J 11/80). The applicant is bound by an 
effective declaration of withdrawal (see J 25/03, J 4/97 and J 10/87) (see 
also E-VIII, 8). 
12. Certificate 
As soon as the European patent specification has been published, the EPO 
issues the proprietor with a certificate attesting that the European patent 
has been granted to the person named on the certificate. Where there is 
more than one proprietor, each of them is issued with a certificate. 
Proprietors may request that a certified copy of the certificate with the 
specification attached be supplied to them upon payment of an 
administrative fee. For further details see the decision of the President of 
the EPO dated 17 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A94, and the notice 
from the EPO dated 17 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A95. 
13. European Patent Bulletin 
If no notice of opposition is recorded in the dossier of the European patent 
within nine months of publication of the mention of grant, the patent 
proprietor is informed and an appropriate entry is published in the 
European Patent Bulletin (Art. 1(1) of the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 15 July 2014, OJ EPO 2014, A86). If it subsequently emerges 
that an opposition was filed in due time, the proprietor is again informed 
and a correction is published in the Bulletin. 
14. Refusal 
A decision to refuse the application cannot be issued without a first 
communication in examination having been sent (see C-III, 4 and E-IX, 4.1) 
or oral proceedings having been held (see C-III, 5). Consequently, the 
examining division may not refuse the application directly after the reply to 
the search opinion under Rule 70a(1) or directly after the reply to the 
WO-ISA under Rule 161(1), even if the objections raised in the search 
opinion or WO-ISA remain the same and there is no pending request for 
oral proceedings. The examining division may also not refuse the 
application if the only communication issued is under Rule 137(4). 
If, despite the applicant's submissions, i.e. amendments or counter-
arguments, objections persist after the applicant's reply to the first 
communication under Art. 94(3) in examination, then a refusal can be 
issued. If there is a pending request for oral proceedings, oral proceedings 
must be held and the decision to refuse will, where appropriate, be 
announced at the end of them. Similarly, if a summons was issued as the 
first action in examination, the decision to refuse will, where appropriate, be 
announced at the end of the oral proceedings. 
If a refusal is envisaged, the first member should bring the application 
before the other members of the examining division, who may then decide 
Rule 74 
Art. 129(a) 
Art. 97(2) 
Art. 113(1) 
Rule 111 
Art. 109 
Art. 111(1) and 
Art. 111(2) 
Part C – Chapter V-16 

 
to refuse the application. In any event, the first member will always consult 
the other members of the division at some stage to establish whether an 
application should be refused or a patent granted. If the division intends to 
refuse the application, a written reasoned decision is necessary and this 
will normally be prepared by the first member (see E-X, 2.3 and E-X, 2.6). 
In preparing the decision, the first member must take care to abide by the 
general principles set out in Art. 113(1), i.e. the decision must be based on 
grounds or evidence that the applicant has had the opportunity to comment 
on (see E-X, 1.1 and E-X, 1.2). 
In addition, the applicant's attention must be directed to the provisions for 
appeal laid down in Art. 106 to Art. 108. If oral proceedings take place 
(see E-III), the decision may be given orally but must subsequently be 
notified in writing, the time limit for appeal then running from the date of 
such notification. 
If the applicant appeals against the decision and the examining division 
considers, in the light of the applicant's statement, that the appeal is 
admissible and well-founded, it should rectify its decision accordingly within 
three months after receipt of the statement of grounds. Otherwise, the 
appeal will be considered by a board of appeal. If a decision to refuse a 
patent is reversed on appeal, the application may be referred back to the 
examining division for further examination. In such a case, the further 
examination will normally be entrusted to the examiner who performed the 
original examination. The examining division is bound by the reasoning of 
the board of appeal in so far as the facts are the same. 
15. Decision according to the state of the file 
A special case is where the applicant does not file comments or 
amendments in reply to the examiner's communication but requests a 
decision "according to the state of the file" or "on the file as it stands", 
meaning that the applicant wishes to close the debate and a decision is 
taken on the basis of the current status of the application and any 
supporting arguments. The decision, which may be appealed, may only be 
based on grounds and evidence that the applicant has had an opportunity 
to comment on (Art. 113(1)). 
15.1 The request for a decision according to the state of the file 
An applicant may file a request for a decision according to the state of the 
file at any stage during examination proceedings, provided that at least one 
communication in examination has been sent (see also C-V, 15.4). The 
request should be in writing (see C-VII, 2.3) and should be explicit and 
unambiguous, preferably using the wording "according to the state of the 
file" or "on the file as it stands". 
If the request is not clear in this respect, the examiner should solve the 
ambiguity with an enquiry to the applicant. 
If, at the time the applicant files a request for a decision according to the 
state of the file, a request for oral proceedings is pending, the examining 
division will interpret the request for a decision as equivalent to the 
applicant's implicit withdrawal of the pending request for oral proceedings. 
Art. 109 
 

Part C – Chapter V-17 
15.2 Decision by means of a standard form 
If the applicant has filed an explicit and unambiguous request for a decision 
according to the state of the file (see C-V, 15.1) in their latest reply, the 
examiner may be in a position to refuse the application using a standard 
form referring to the previous communication. To comply with the 
requirement that such a decision be reasoned (Rule 111(2)), a number of 
conditions have to be met: 
(i) 
the previous communication must properly identify the application 
documents on file, be well-reasoned and complete with respect to the 
grounds and the reasons for the refusal of the current request and 
address all the arguments raised by the applicant 
(ii) 
no new arguments or amendments have been submitted by the 
applicant since the previous communication 
(iii) 
all objections raised in the previous communication referred to must 
still apply. 
If, in its reply to the last communication from the examining division, the 
applicant has submitted new arguments that are at least likely to be 
effective, these arguments cannot be ignored even if, in the same reply, the 
applicant has explicitly requested a decision according to the state of the 
file. In this case, the division must consider these freshly presented 
arguments either by issuing a regular reasoned decision (see C-V, 15.3) or 
by issuing a further communication (see C-V, 15.4). 
A decision according to the state of the file by means of a standard form 
can be based on minutes of a consultation if they contain a full exposition of 
all the legal and factual reasons for refusing the application, as in the case 
of minutes of a consultation issued as the first communication in 
examination (see C-VII, 2.5). 
Examining divisions are not to refer to the minutes of oral proceedings in 
decisions by means of a standard form. 
Although it is possible by way of exception to refer to more than one 
communication in the standard form, the examiner should carefully 
consider the requirements of Rule 111(2). In particular, if the different 
communications deal with different sets of claims, such that it is not clear 
which of the reasons given by the examining division in its communications 
might be essential to the decision to refuse, a fully reasoned decision 
should be issued instead (see C-V, 15.3). 
15.3 Issuing a self-contained decision 
If the conditions set out in C-V, 15.2 are not met, a self-contained decision 
to refuse must be issued to comply with Rule 111(2). This is necessary, for 
example, where the numerous objections raised in the previous 
communications with respect to different sets of claims render unclear the 
grounds and the reasons for the refusal. This also applies if the applicant 
has made further submissions (including amendments) since the previous 
communication, where these do not cause the subsequent decision to be 
Part C – Chapter V-18 

 
based on grounds or evidence on which the applicant has not had the 
opportunity to present comments. In all cases, the requirements of 
Art. 113(1) should be carefully considered (see also E-X, 1). 
15.4 Issuing a further communication (no refusal) 
If it appears that the previous communications were insufficiently reasoned 
or incomplete, or if the applicant has filed amendments and/or arguments 
since the previous communication, the examiner should carefully consider 
Art. 113(1) and Rule 111(2) before issuing a refusal (see E-X, 1). A further 
communication may have to be issued with sufficient reasoning unless oral 
proceedings are to be held (see E-III, 2), in which case the reasoning would 
be given in the summons (Rule 116(1)). In the communication or summons 
the applicant should be informed that the request for a decision according 
to the state of the file could not be followed. 
 

Part C – Chapter V-19 
Annex 
Standard marks for indicating amendments or corrections by the 
divisions 
1.  Insertion of letters and words 
Any insertion made using the in-house electronic tool is done in the text 
itself. No separate marks are needed in the margins or at the top or bottom 
of the page. 
In the PDF file created from the working copy of the document prepared for 
the printer ("Druckexemplar"), the tool will insert change bars to the right of 
amendments and indicate amended pages as such. The tool also adds 
pairs of insertion signs to mark the beginning and end of each insertion: 
Mark 
Explanation 
 
Denotes the beginning of text inserted 
 
Denotes the end of text inserted 
"No break", "line break" or "paragraph break" signs precede and follow the 
signs above to indicate whether the inserted text should be kept in the 
same line or if a new line or paragraph should start before or after the 
inserted text: 
Mark 
Explanation 
 
No breaks: inserted text is kept on the same line 
(this is the default) 
 
Line break: starts a new line (must be set if needed)
¶ 
Paragraph break: starts a new paragraph (must be 
set if needed) 
If inserting an entire newly filed page, e.g. a page numbered "1a", the 
instruction [insert page 1a] is used. 
 

Part C – Chapter VI-1 
Chapter VI – Time limits and acceleration of 
examination 
1. Time limits for response to communications from the examiner 
1.1 General considerations 
The general considerations relating to time limits are set out in E-VIII. The 
time limit for response to a communication from the examiner should in 
general be between two and four months in accordance with Rule 132. The 
period to be allowed will be determined by the examiner taking all the 
factors relevant to the particular application into account. These include the 
language normally used by the applicant or their representative; the 
number and nature of the objections raised; the length and technical 
complexity of the application; the proximity of the EPO to the applicant or, if 
they have one, their representative and the distance separating the two. 
If the only outstanding objection is the need to amend the description, the 
examiner may invite the applicant to amend the description by issuing a 
communication under Art. 94(3) with a two-month time limit to reply. 
Alternatively, the examiner may consult the applicant informally, e.g. by 
telephone, explain the objection and set a one-month time limit 
documented in the minutes of the consultation referring to this objection 
(unless a shorter limit is agreed during the consultation). 
This time limit can be extended if the applicant so requests before it expires 
(see E-VIII, 1.6). Failure to respond to a communication under Art. 94(3) 
and Rule 71(1) and (2) in due time results in the application being deemed 
withdrawn. This loss of rights is subject to further processing (see E-VIII, 2). 
1.2 Special circumstances 
In certain special circumstances the examiner may allow a time limit of up 
to six months. The six-month period may be appropriate, for instance, if the 
applicant resides a long way from the representative and the language of 
the proceedings is not one to which the applicant is accustomed; or if the 
subject-matter of the application or the objections raised are exceptionally 
complicated (for more information see E-VIII, 1.2). 
The search opinion is not a communication under Art. 94(3). 
2. Influencing the speed of examination proceedings – PACE 
With a request for accelerated examination under the programme for 
accelerated prosecution of European patent applications (PACE), the 
applicant can speed up the proceedings at the examination stage (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 30 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A93). For 
further information, see E-VIII, 4.2. 
3. Further ways to accelerate examination 
Where the applicant files a request for examination before the search report 
is transmitted to them, they may also dispense with the need to comply with 
the invitation pursuant to Rule 70(2) and file a categorical request for 
examination whatever the search result may be, thereby also accelerating 
Art. 94(1) and (4) 
Rule 132 
Rule 70(2) 
Art. 11(b) RFees 
Rule 62(1) 
Part C – Chapter VI-2 

 
 
the procedure (see the notice from the EPO dated 30 November 2015, 
OJ EPO 2015, A93). In this case, confirmation that they desire to proceed 
further with their application is deemed given when the search report is 
transmitted to them so that in accordance with Rule 62(1) the search report 
is not accompanied by a search opinion. Under these circumstances, if the 
application is not in order for grant, a communication under Art. 94(3) and 
Rule 71(1) and (2) is transmitted to the applicant. Own-volition 
amendments under Rule 137(2) may in that case be submitted by the 
applicant in reply to this communication (see C-III, 2). 
If the application is in order for grant, the subsequent procedure will depend 
on whether it is possible at that time to carry out the search for conflicting 
European patent applications according to Art. 54(3) (see C-IV, 7.1 and 
B-XI, 7). If it can, and assuming no conflicting applications are identified, 
then the communication under Rule 71(3) is transmitted to the applicant. If 
it cannot yet be carried out, then the communication from the examining 
division will be postponed until the said search is completed. If the 
European patent application is subsequently withdrawn before the 
substantive examination has begun, the examination fee will be refunded in 
full. If substantive examination has already begun, withdrawal of the 
application may still result in a refund of 50% of the examination fee in the 
cases laid down in Art. 11(b) RFees (for more details, see A-VI, 2.5 and 
OJ EPO 2016, A49). 
The applicant can also accelerate the processing of Euro-PCT applications 
by waiving the right to the communication under Rule 161 and Rule 162 
(see E-IX, 3.1) or by filing an explicit request for early processing of an 
international application by the EPO as designated/elected Office (see 
E-IX, 2.8). 
 

Part C – Chapter VII-1 
Chapter VII – Other procedures in examination 
1. General remark 
In this chapter, the term "applicant" is intended to mean "representative" 
where the applicant has appointed one. Where this is the case, the 
procedures described here should be conducted with that representative. 
2. Consultations 
2.1 General 
There are instances where personal consultation with the applicant can be 
helpful in advancing the procedure. Such a consultation will preferably be 
held by videoconference so that, where necessary, documents can be 
presented, other persons participate and the identity of those attending 
verified (see C-VII, 2.2). The shared area in MyEPO Portfolio provides a 
space for applicants and examiners to upload documents and informally 
discuss changes (see OJ EPO 2023, A59). Consultations can also be held 
by telephone at the request of the applicant, if the situation so requires. 
The consultation may take place at the initiative of either the applicant or 
the examiner or formalities officer. However, the decision on whether it is to 
be held is up to the formalities officer or examiner. A consultation request 
from the applicant should usually be granted unless the nature of the issue 
to be discussed requires formal proceedings or the examiner believes that 
no useful purpose would be served by such a discussion. For example, 
where substantial differences of opinion exist in examination, written 
procedure or oral proceedings are normally more appropriate. 
Typical situations in which the applicant may want a consultation are: 
(i) 
to enquire about a procedural issue such as how to proceed in 
particular circumstances (note however that the examiner is not 
normally in charge of formal issues such as extensions of time limits 
and payment of fees); for enquiries as to the processing of files, see 
E-VIII, 7 
(ii) 
where there appears to be an error in the communication or in the 
applicant's reply making it difficult for them or the examiner to 
prepare the next reply/communication (e.g. wrong document cited, 
communication based on wrong set of claims, new submissions 
referred to but not included). 
Typical situations in which the examiner may consider it appropriate to 
consult the applicant are: 
(iii) 
where there appears to be confusion about certain points in dispute, 
e.g. the applicant seems to have misunderstood the examiner's 
arguments – or vice versa – so that the written procedure is leading 
nowhere 
(iv) 
where the application seems to be ready for grant except that the 
examiner needs to clarify some minor issues with the applicant or 
Part C – Chapter VII-2 

 
 
would like to discuss a proposal for amendments to overcome the 
objections raised 
(v) 
where amendments or corrections requested by the applicant after 
the Rule 71(3) communication have been submitted but the examiner 
cannot agree to them. 
For consultations in response to the EESR before the application has 
entered the examination phase, see B-XI, 8. 
Telephone conversations held for the sole purpose of arranging a date for a 
consultation or oral proceedings do not in and of themselves constitute a 
consultation within the meaning of this section. Therefore, no minutes need 
to be prepared (C-VII, 2.4) unless so required where the applicant agrees 
to a notice period of less than two months for oral proceedings (E-III, 6). 
2.2 Persons participating in the consultation  
The person consulted must be entitled to act for the applicant before the 
EPO. If the applicant is a natural or legal person having either residence or 
place of business in a contracting state, consultations may only be 
conducted with: 
(a) 
the applicant (see A-VIII, 1.1) 
(b) 
a professional representative (see A-VIII, 1.1) 
(c) 
a duly authorised employee of the applicant (see A-VIII, 1.2) or, to 
the extent defined in Art. 134(8), a legal practitioner (see A-VIII, 1.4). 
Regarding (c), see also A-VIII, 1.5. 
If the applicant is a natural or legal person having neither residence nor 
place of business in a contracting state, consultations may only be 
conducted with: 
– 
a professional representative (see A-VIII, 1.1) 
– 
a legal practitioner (see A-VIII, 1.4 and A-VIII, 1.5). 
The person entitled to act before the EPO, i.e. one of those listed above, 
may be accompanied by other persons, such as the inventor, a 
non-European representative or an employee of the applicant. At the 
request of the entitled person, such other persons may be allowed to take 
part in the consultation if their participation is relevant to the proceedings. 
Where the consultation is held by videoconference, these persons may 
connect from a different location than the entitled person. 
If there is any doubt as to the identity of any of the persons participating in 
the consultation or if the consulted person so requests, the examiner or 
formalities officer will check the identity of the person or persons 
concerned. This can be done by inviting them to show an official identity 
document to the camera in the case of a videoconference or to send a copy 
 

Part C – Chapter VII-3 
of the document by email. For data protection reasons, the copy of the 
identity document sent by email will not be included in the file (see also 
E-III, 8.3.1). 
From the examining division, only the first member dealing with the case 
will normally be present. However, there is no objection to one or even both 
of the other members participating in the consultation. 
When the inventor or an expert is attending the consultation, it is 
recommended that the chair of the examining division at least should also 
attend. However, the applicant or representative does not have the right to 
demand the presence of additional division members. If a request is made 
for a consultation with all three members, it will usually be advisable to 
arrange for the holding of oral proceedings instead. 
2.3 Informal nature of consultations 
A consultation is not a formal procedure (for formal oral proceedings before 
the examining division, see E-III), and the character of the minutes of the 
consultation depends on the nature of the matters discussed. It should 
always be made clear to the applicant that any agreement reached is 
ultimately subject to the views of the other members of the examining 
division. A decision cannot be taken during a consultation. 
Oral statements made during a consultation must be confirmed in writing in 
order to be procedurally effective. Indeed, such statements are not normally 
legally binding. Such a statement cannot, for instance, be effective to meet 
a time limit (see, however, C-VII, 2.4). For the purpose of the European 
grant procedure, except in oral proceedings, only written statements are 
effective and only from the date on which they are received by the EPO. 
Oral statements substantively addressing the objections raised in an earlier 
communication may however lead the examiner to cancel any running time 
limit (see C-VII, 2.4 (iv)). Furthermore, documents validly submitted by 
email during the consultation (see C-VII, 3) may indeed be effective to meet 
a running time limit (see C-IV, 3). 
If a fresh objection of substance is raised during a consultation and no 
amendment to meet it is agreed at the time, the objection must be 
confirmed by a communication of the minutes of the consultation, giving the 
applicant a fresh period within which to reply (see C-VII, 2.4(iii)). 
2.4 Minutes of a consultation 
The minutes of a consultation should list the participants, summarise the 
main results and state any oral requests. They must be signed by the 
examiner. Documents filed by email during a consultation (see C-VII, 3), 
such as new claims or an amended description, must be attached to the 
minutes. 
Part C – Chapter VII-4 

 
 
The minutes should always indicate whether the next action is due to come 
from the applicant or the examiner. In this regard, the minutes when 
despatched to the applicant may: 
(i) 
be issued for information only, in which case if a time limit is still 
pending, it should be observed; if no time limit is pending, no action 
is required from the applicant 
(ii) 
be issued such as to extend a pending time limit, in which case the 
applicant must reply within that extended time limit 
(iii) 
be issued such as to set a new time limit for response, in which case 
the applicant must reply within this new time limit 
(iv) 
be issued such as to cancel a pending time limit 
(v) 
be issued such as to reflect the decision to cancel scheduled oral 
proceedings where an agreement on an allowable set of claims can 
be reached during the consultation. Cancellation of the oral 
proceedings is communicated to the applicant orally during the 
consultation and noted in the minutes. No separate communication 
regarding the cancellation of the oral proceedings is issued 
(vi) 
be issued for information only where the applicant announces during 
the consultation that they do not intend to attend oral proceedings. 
The applicant is informed that oral statements must be confirmed in 
writing to be procedurally effective (see C-VII, 2.3). 
Where the consultation is concerned with the clarification of obscurities, the 
resolution of uncertainties or putting the application in order by clearing up 
a number of minor points, it will usually be sufficient for the examiner to 
make a note in the minutes of the matters discussed and the conclusions 
reached or amendments agreed unless a time limit is set for reply (see 
below). 
Where the consultation involves the discussion of weightier matters, such 
as questions of novelty, inventive step, unity or whether the amendment 
introduces added subject-matter, a fuller note of the topics raised will be 
made in the minutes. In particular, the minutes will specify in concrete 
terms the topics discussed, together with any amendments agreed, any 
opposing views, the reasons for any change of opinion and any conclusions 
drawn unless these are clear from other documents in the dossier. 
Furthermore, the reasons for any amendments required by the examiner 
should be clearly indicated. 
It is important to avoid statements that are unclear, ambiguous or 
universally applicable in the minutes. For example, statements such as 
"Amendments to the claims were proposed to take account of the prior art 
cited in the search report" are of no assistance to members of the public, 
other members of the division or indeed the first member at later stages of 
the procedure. The same applies to conclusions worded in a generalised 
manner. 
 

Part C – Chapter VII-5 
If the minutes are sent as a first communication in examination, see 
C-VII, 2.5. 
The minutes are placed in the dossier, made available for file inspection 
(including all documents filed by an applicant or representative during the 
consultation) and sent to the applicant or their representative, even where 
the consultation merely changes/confirms/cancels the time/date of a 
proposed consultation. 
However, by way of exception, consultations relating to amendments 
agreed immediately prior to completing the Rule 71(3) communication may 
be reflected in that communication, provided that there is no uncertainty for 
the public as to what was agreed. The amendments must be identified as 
precisely as possible. 
2.5 Minutes as the first communication in examination 
A consultation may be used as the first action in examination provided that: 
– 
minutes are issued 
– 
the minutes present the matters discussed with the same level of 
information and structure as an Art. 94(3) communication 
– 
the minutes are issued with a time limit for reply not shorter than four 
months unless agreed otherwise with the applicant. 
Matters (e.g. objections or reasoning) not discussed during the consultation 
itself may be included in such minutes. However, it must be made clear that 
they were not discussed during the consultation. 
If the above criteria are met, minutes issued as the first action in 
examination replace the first communication under Art. 94(3) and 
Rule 71(1), (2) (see C-III, 4). 
Where the examining division is considering issuing a summons to oral 
proceedings as the first action in examination (see C-III, 5), the examiner 
may inform the representative of this in a call. Instead of issuing separate 
minutes, a remark regarding the call may be included in the summons. If, 
however, the examining division decides not to issue summons at that 
stage, minutes must be issued. 
3. Use of email 
At present, email is an admissible filing means only for the submission of 
subsequently filed documents as referred to in Rule 50 during consultations 
and during oral proceedings held by videoconference (for details, in 
particular on signature and format of attachments, see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 13 May 2020, OJ EPO 2020, A71, and 
E-III, 8.5.2). 
Other than in the above-mentioned cases, email has no legal effect in 
proceedings under the EPC and thus cannot be used to validly perform any 
procedural 
act 
and, 
in 
particular, 
to 
comply 
with 
time 
limits 
Part C – Chapter VII-6 

 
 
(see OJ EPO 2000, 458, and A-VIII, 2.5). If, for instance, shortly before oral 
proceedings, the applicant would like to submit new requests and/or 
amended documents, they should do so by electronic filing or fax. 
Documents submitted via electronic filing are normally visible in the 
electronic file on the same day. 
Examples of situations where exchanges by email may be useful are: 
(i) 
to arrange a date for a consultation 
(ii) 
when, during a consultation, possible amendments to claims are 
being discussed and the applicant wants to communicate them 
immediately without submitting them formally 
(iii) 
shortly before oral proceedings to send an electronic copy of 
amended claims in addition to the official submission made; this 
ensures that the examining division gets the documents well in time 
to prepare for the oral proceedings. 
Emails cannot replace an official communication under Art. 94(3). 
3.1 Initiation of exchanges by email 
Except in cases where it is a valid filing means (see C-VII, 3 and 
E-III, 8.5.2), neither the examiner nor the applicant should use email 
without having previously agreed to this, e.g. during a consultation. There 
must be mutual agreement between the examiner and the applicant to such 
use if the content of the email goes beyond simply arranging of a date for a 
consultation or oral proceedings. Furthermore, the mere fact that an email 
address is indicated on a letter head does not mean that the examiner can 
use it for file-related matters. 
If, on the other hand, an examiner receives an email from an applicant 
concerning procedural requests or addressing substantive issues without 
previous agreement, this email cannot simply be ignored, but must be dealt 
with, ensuring that the content is put in the official file (see also T 599/06). 
A reply should be sent making clear that email is not an official means of 
communication and that requests should be filed by permitted means 
(see A-II, 1.1, A-II, 1.2 and A-II, 1.3). 
3.2 Confidentiality 
For 
non-published 
applications, 
confidentiality 
must 
be 
carefully 
maintained, and substantive matters should not form part of any email 
correspondence about such applications. 
3.3 Inclusion in the file of any email exchange 
If email is used, it is essential to ensure that email exchanges are properly 
documented in the file by sending the result of the consultation to the 
applicant for information with no time limit. This ensures that the exchange 
is included in the public part of the file and that the applicant is aware of 
this. 
 

Part C – Chapter VII-7 
Submissions filed by email during a consultation or during oral proceedings 
held by videoconference, including all attachments, should be annexed to 
the minutes (see E-III, 8.5.2 for details). 
4. Taking of evidence 
4.1 General remark 
The general considerations relating to the taking of evidence are set out in 
E-IV. This section deals only with the kind of evidence most likely to arise in 
pre-grant proceedings (i.e. written evidence). 
4.2 Producing evidence 
An examining division does not, as a general rule, require evidence to be 
produced. The primary function of the examiner in proceedings before grant 
is to point out to the applicant any ways in which the application does not 
meet the requirements of the EPC. If the applicant does not accept the 
examiner's view, then it is for them to decide whether they wish to produce 
evidence in support of their case and, if so, what form that evidence should 
take. The examining division should afford the applicant a reasonable 
opportunity to produce any evidence that is likely to be relevant. 
However, this opportunity should not be given where the examining division 
is convinced that it would serve no useful purpose or result in undue delay. 
4.3 Written evidence 
Written evidence can include the supply of information or the production of 
a document or a sworn statement. 
For example, to rebut an examiner's allegation of lack of inventive step, the 
applicant might supply information as to the technical advantages of the 
invention. Or they might produce a sworn statement, either from themself or 
from an independent witness, purporting to show that workers in the art 
have been trying for a long time unsuccessfully to solve the problem with 
which the invention is concerned or that the invention is a completely new 
departure in the relevant art. 
5. Oral proceedings 
If a request for oral proceedings, even conditional, was filed before the 
examining division became responsible for the application (see C-II, 1), the 
division must honour the request, even if it was not repeated in 
examination. 
On dealing with new requests filed in reply to a summons to oral 
proceedings, see C-IV, 8. 
As a rule, oral proceedings in examination proceedings are held by 
videoconference unless the direct taking of evidence is required or if there 
are other serious reasons for not doing so, e.g. where an impediment 
prevents an applicant or representative from participating in oral 
proceedings held by videoconference. Sweeping objections against the 
reliability of videoconferencing technology or the non-availability of 
videoconferencing equipment will, as a rule, not qualify as serious reasons 
Part C – Chapter VII-8 

 
 
in this regard, nor will the need to consider written evidence (see E-III, 1.3, 
OJ EPO 2020, A134 and A40). 
The general considerations relating to oral proceedings are set out in E-III. 
6. 
Examination of observations by third parties 
The general considerations relating to observations from third parties are 
set out in E-VI, 3. 
 

Part C – Chapter VIII-1 
Chapter VIII – Work within the examining 
division 
1. General remarks 
An examining division will normally consist of three technical examiners. 
However, within the examining division responsible for the application, one 
member (the first member) will, as a general rule, be entrusted to carry out 
all substantive examination work up to the point of a decision to grant a 
patent, issue a summons to oral proceedings or refuse the application. 
While acting on behalf of the examining division in all communications with 
the applicant up to that point, this examiner may confer informally with the 
other members of the division at any time on specific points of doubt or 
difficulty. The term "examiner" as used in this part of the Guidelines is 
normally understood to mean the "first" member. 
As stated above, the first member may seek the advice of other members 
of the examining division at any stage in the examination. However, there 
will come a point when it becomes appropriate for them to refer the case 
formally to the other members of the examining division. This will be when 
they consider the case to be in order to proceed to grant or, alternatively, 
where there seems no possibility of an amendment to overcome their 
objections or where the applicant has not overcome these objections, and 
when they consider the case to be in order to proceed to refusal. There are 
also other circumstances in which reference to the examining division is 
appropriate, e.g. oral proceedings may be suggested by the examiner or 
requested by the applicant because an impasse has been reached. In 
considering whether to refer the application to the division, the examiner 
should be guided by the principle stated in C-IV, 3. 
The first member should also bear in mind that when they issue a 
communication they do so in the name of the division, and the applicant is 
entitled to assume that if the examiner had doubts as to the views of the 
rest of the division, they would have discussed the matter with them 
beforehand. 
Although the examining division assumes ultimate responsibility for an 
application as soon as that application passes to it under Rule 10, formal 
matters are normally dealt with by a formalities officer (see the decision of 
the President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, OJ EPO 2014, A6; 
OJ EPO 2015, A104). Examiners should not spend time checking the work 
of the Receiving Section or the formalities officer. However, they should 
refer an application to the formalities officer for further consideration if they 
believe the formalities report to be incorrect or incomplete. 
If required by specific circumstances (e.g. sickness), an application may be 
reallocated to another examiner/examining division. In such cases, the 
decision to reallocate will be taken by the line manager. 
2. Recommendation to grant 
If the examiner considers that the application satisfies the requirements of 
the EPC and is thus in order to proceed to grant, they should make a brief 
Art. 18(2) 
Part C – Chapter VIII-2 

 
 
written report (the "votum"). As a general rule, the examiner will list in this 
report the reasons why, in their opinion, the subject-matter as claimed in 
the application is not obvious having regard to the state of the art. They 
should normally comment on the document reflecting the nearest prior art 
and the features of the claimed invention that make it patentable, although 
there may be exceptional circumstances where this is not necessary, 
e.g. where patentability is based on a surprising effect. They should also 
indicate how any apparently obscure but important points have ultimately 
been clarified, and if there are any borderline questions that the examiner 
has resolved in favour of the applicant, they should draw attention 
specifically to these. 
3. 
Recommendation to refuse 
When referring an application that is not in order for the grant of a patent to 
the examining division, the first member should confer with the other 
members of the division, bringing to their attention the points at issue, 
summarising the case history to the extent necessary to enable them to 
obtain a quick grasp of the essential facts and recommending the action to 
be taken, e.g. refusal, or grant conditional upon certain further 
amendments. As the other members will need to study the case 
themselves, there is no need for a detailed exposition. It will be useful, 
however, to draw attention to any unusual features or points not readily 
apparent from the documents themselves. If the first member recommends 
refusal and the issue seems clear-cut, they may have a draft reasoned 
decision ready for issue by the examining division (see C-V, 14); if the 
issue is not clear-cut, the drafting of the reasoned decision should be 
deferred until the division has discussed the case. 
4. 
Tasks of the other members of the examining division 
When an application is referred to the other members of the division, they 
will first consider the case individually and each will indicate their opinion on 
the course of action to be taken. If there is complete agreement with the 
first member's recommendation, no further consultation will be necessary. 
Any further action needed will be entrusted to the first member. If, initially, 
there is not complete agreement with the first member, or at least one 
member of the division wishes to discuss the case further, further 
consultation will be arranged. In such discussions, the division should strive 
for unanimity, but where this seems unlikely, the difference of opinion must 
be resolved by voting. When the division is enlarged to four members 
(see C-VIII, 7), the chair has a casting vote, where necessary. 
The other members of the division should bear in mind that their function is 
not to completely re-examine the application. If, following a discussion, the 
first member's conclusions are generally considered to be reasonable, the 
other members should accept them. 
5. 
Further communication with the applicant 
If, in the opinion of the examining division, the application can be amended 
to bring it into a form that meets the requirements of the EPC, then the first 
member should be entrusted with informing the applicant of the division's 
opinion that the application should be refused on certain grounds unless 
satisfactory amendments are submitted within a stated period (see C-VI, 1). 
Art. 18(2) 
 

Part C – Chapter VIII-3 
If, within the time limit, satisfactory amendments are made, the examiner 
will then report back to the division recommending that the application 
should proceed to grant. If not, they should report back recommending 
refusal. 
5.1 When can a summons to oral proceedings be issued in 
substantive examination? 
At the beginning of substantive examination, if the examining division is of 
the opinion that the application cannot be granted directly, at least one 
substantive communication within the meaning of Art. 94(3) will generally 
be sent before the division issues a summons to oral proceedings 
(see C-III, 4). 
In particular, neither the search opinion of an EESR or a supplementary 
search (ESOP) nor an opinion or report from the PCT procedure (WO-ISA, 
SISR, IPRP or IPER) is a communication under Art. 94(3), so even if the 
applicant has replied to them, it is not generally appropriate to send a 
summons as a first communication in European substantive examination. 
Nor are the following communications/requests considered as substantive 
communications from the examining division for this purpose: invitation 
under Rule 62a or Rule 63, communication under Rule 137(4), request 
under Rule 53(3), request under Art. 124 and Rule 141, invitation under 
Rule 164(2)(a). 
Exceptionally, a summons to oral proceedings may be issued as the first 
action in examination proceedings, provided that the criteria set out in 
C-III, 5 are met. 
In examination proceedings, where the applicant has been invited to 
provide a translation of the priority according to Rule 53(3) (see A-III, 6.8.2 
and F-VI, 3.4), no summons to oral proceedings will be issued until either 
the translation is provided or the period for further processing in respect of 
the time limit according to Rule 53(3) has expired. 
6. Decision 
All decisions are issued by the examining division as a whole and not by an 
individual examiner. All members therefore sign the written decision, 
irrespective of whether it was unanimous. If, exceptionally, one or more 
division members cannot sign the decision, one of the other members –
normally the chair – may sign it on their behalf, subject to the conditions 
defined in E-X, 2.3. A seal may replace the signature. 
7. Enlargement of the examining division; consultation of a legally 
qualified member 
If the examining division deems it necessary given the nature of a decision, 
it is enlarged to include a legally qualified member. The decision to enlarge 
or to set aside an enlargement lies with the examining division. 
The participation of a legally qualified member or at least internal 
consultation of Directorate Patent Law and Processes, the unit responsible 
for providing legally qualified members for examining and opposition 
Art. 76(1) 
Rule 113 
Art. 18(2) 
Part C – Chapter VIII-4 

 
 
divisions, will be required in the event of a difficult legal question not yet 
solved by the Guidelines or jurisprudence. 
The applicant is informed of the division's enlargement in the 
communication accompanying and/or the annex to the summons or the 
decision following enlargement, as appropriate. Once the division has been 
enlarged, communications or decisions must be signed by all four 
members. 
If the examining division has been enlarged to four members, the chair will 
have a casting vote. As a rule, enlargement will be required in cases 
involving technical opinions (Art. 25 – see E-XIII, 3.1) and where evidence 
has to be taken according to Rule 117 (including the giving of evidence by 
witnesses – see E-IV). It is also to be considered in the case of oral 
proceedings. 
Where an examining division has been enlarged pursuant to Art. 18(2) but 
the case is decided in a three-member composition, there should be clear 
evidence in the public file that a decision to set aside enlargement was 
taken by the division in its four-member composition prior to the final 
decision. 
Therefore, if enlargement is considered no longer necessary, the examining 
division will set it aside. This decision is not separately appealable. The 
applicant is informed about the setting aside of the enlargement in the 
communication accompanying and/or the annex to the summons or the 
decision following the setting aside of the enlargement. 
Depending on the nature of the problem, as an alternative to enlarging the 
examining division, it may be sufficient to consult a legally qualified member 
in Directorate Patent Law and Processes. For instance, doubts may arise 
whether an application concerns an invention within the meaning of 
Art. 52(2) or whether the claimed invention is excluded from patentability by 
virtue of Art. 53. Such consultation may also be appropriate where legal 
considerations predominate in a decision, as in proceedings following a 
request for re-establishment of rights according to Art. 122. Formalities 
officers may also consult Directorate Patent Law and Processes within the 
scope of the duties conferred to them under Rule 11(3) (see the decision of 
the President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, OJ EPO 2014, A6). 
 

Part C – Chapter IX-1 
Chapter IX – Special applications 
1. Divisional applications (see also A-IV, 1) 
1.1 General remarks 
A divisional application may be filed subsequent to the filing of a European 
patent application or on a Euro-PCT application's entry into the European 
phase. The divisional application is accorded the same filing date as the 
parent application, which must be pending when the divisional application is 
filed (A-IV, 1.1.1), and benefits from any right of priority of the parent 
application in respect of subject-matter contained in the divisional 
application. A European patent application may give rise to more than one 
divisional application, and a divisional application may itself give rise to one 
or more divisional applications. 
Divisional applications are to be treated the same as ordinary applications 
and are subject to the same requirements unless specific EPC provisions, 
in particular Art. 76 or Rule 36, require something different (G 1/05, 
G 1/06). 
Furthermore, as soon as the requirements of Rule 36 and Art. 76(1) are 
fulfilled, the proceedings for grant of a divisional application become 
separate and independent from the proceedings concerning the parent 
application (G 4/98). Pending opposition or appeal proceedings concerning 
the parent application (or any member of that family of applications) do not 
constitute grounds for staying the examination proceedings for a divisional 
application, either by the EPO on its own initiative or on request. Reasons 
for a stay or interruption of proceedings are set out in E-VII, 1 to E-VII, 3. 
1.2 Voluntary and mandatory division 
Applicants may file a divisional application of their own volition (voluntary 
division). The most common reason, however, for filing a divisional 
application is to meet an objection under Art. 82 due to lack of unity of 
invention (mandatory division). If the examiner raises an objection due to 
lack of unity, the applicant is allowed a period (see C-VI, 1) in which to limit 
their application to a single invention. The limitation of the parent 
application has to be clear and unconditional. The communication inviting 
the applicant to limit the application due to lack of unity should therefore 
indicate that if not limited within the set time limit the application may be 
refused. 
1.3 Abandonment of subject-matter 
The mere deletion of subject-matter in the parent application is not 
prejudicial to the later filing of a divisional application. When deleting 
subject-matter, the applicant should, however, avoid any statements that 
could be interpreted as abandonment with substantive effect, thereby 
impeding the valid filing of a divisional application for that subject-matter 
(see also H-III, 2.5, last paragraph). 
Art. 76(1) 
Art. 82 
Part C – Chapter IX-2 

 
 
1.4 Examination of a divisional application 
The substantive examination of a divisional application should in principle 
be carried out in the same way as for any other application. However, there 
are a number of special points to be considered (see also C-III, 5). The 
claims of a divisional application need not be limited to subject-matter 
already claimed in the parent application's claims. Furthermore, no abuse 
of the system of divisional applications can be identified in the mere fact 
that the claims of the application on which the examining division had then 
to decide had a broader scope than the claims granted in relation to the 
parent application (see T 422/07). 
However, under Art. 76(1), the subject-matter may not extend beyond the 
content of the parent application as filed. If a divisional application as filed 
contains subject-matter additional to that contained in the parent application 
as filed, it can be amended later so that its subject-matter no longer 
extends beyond the earlier content, even at a time when the earlier 
application is no longer pending (see G 1/05). If the applicant is unwilling to 
remedy the defect by removing that additional subject-matter, the divisional 
application must be refused under Art. 97(2) for failure to comply with 
Art. 76(1). 
The divisional application cannot be converted into an independent 
application taking its own filing date. Moreover, a further divisional 
application for this additional subject-matter should also be refused under 
Art. 97(2) for failure to comply with Art. 76(1). 
Amendments made to a divisional application subsequent to its filing must 
comply with the requirements of Art. 123(2), i.e. they may not extend the 
subject-matter beyond the content of the divisional application as filed 
(see G 1/05 and T 873/94). If the amendments have not been identified 
and/or their basis in the application as filed not indicated by the applicant 
(see H-III, 2.1) and the application is one of those mentioned in H-III, 2.1.4, 
the examining division may send a communication under Rule 137(4) 
requesting the applicant to provide this information (see H-III, 2.1.1). 
If the subject-matter of a divisional application is restricted to only a part of 
the subject-matter claimed in the parent application, this part must be 
directly and unambiguously derivable from the parent application as being a 
separate part or entity, i.e. one that can be used even outside the context of 
the invention of the parent application (see T 545/92). 
In the case of a sequence of applications consisting of a root (originating) 
application followed by divisional applications, each divided from its 
predecessor (see A-IV, 1.1.2), it is a necessary and sufficient condition for 
a divisional application of that sequence to comply with Art. 76(1), second 
sentence, that anything disclosed in that divisional application be directly 
and unambiguously derivable from what is disclosed in each of the 
preceding applications as filed (see G 1/06). 
1.5 Description and drawings 
The description and drawings of the parent application and the/each 
divisional application should in principle be confined to matter that is 
Art. 76(1) 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part C – Chapter IX-3 
relevant to the invention claimed in that application. However, amendment 
of the description should be required only where absolutely necessary. 
Thus, the repetition in a divisional application of matter in the parent 
application need not be objected to unless it is clearly unrelated to or 
inconsistent with the invention claimed in the divisional application. As for 
the matter of cross-references, there is no need for the examiner to check 
in the description since, under present practice, cross-references are 
always made between the parent and divisional applications. These appear 
on the front page of the respective application and patent published after 
receipt of the divisional application unless the technical preparations for 
publication have already been completed. 
1.6 Claims 
Parent and divisional applications may not claim the same subject-matter, 
even in different words (for further information, see G-IV, 5.4). The 
difference between the claimed subject-matter of the two applications must 
be clearly distinguishable. As a general rule, however, one application may 
claim its own subject-matter in combination with that of the other 
application. In other words, if the parent and divisional applications claim 
separate and distinct elements – A and B respectively – that function in 
combination, one of the two applications may also include a claim for 
A plus B. 
2. Applications resulting from a decision under Art. 61 
2.1 General remarks 
In certain circumstances, before a patent has been granted on a particular 
application, it may be adjudged by a final decision of a national court that a 
person other than the applicant is entitled to the grant of a patent on it. In 
this event the third party may either: 
(i) 
prosecute the application as their own application in place of the 
applicant 
(ii) 
file a new European patent application in respect of the same 
invention 
(iii) 
request that the application be refused. 
If the first of these options is chosen, the third party becomes the applicant 
in place of the former applicant and the prosecution of the application is 
continued from the position at which it was interrupted (see also A-IV, 2). 
If, however, the third party files a new application under Art. 61(1)(b), the 
provisions of Art. 76(1) apply to this new application mutatis mutandis. This 
means that the new application is treated as though it were a divisional 
application i.e. it takes the filing date and benefit of any priority right of the 
original application (see also A-IV, 1.2). The examiner must therefore 
ensure that the subject-matter content of the new application does not 
extend beyond that of the original application as filed. The original 
application is deemed withdrawn on the new application's filing date for the 
designated states concerned. 
Art. 61(1)(a) 
Art. 61(1)(b) 
Art. 61(1)(c) 
Art. 61(1) and (2) 
Rule 17(1) 
Part C – Chapter IX-4 

 
 
2.2 Original application no longer pending 
In cases where the original application has been withdrawn, refused or 
deemed withdrawn and is thus no longer pending, Art. 61(1)(b) is 
applicable, allowing the third party to still file a new European patent 
application in respect of the same invention (see G 3/92). 
2.3 Partial entitlement 
If, by a final decision, it is adjudged that a third party is entitled to the grant 
of a European patent in respect of only part of the matter disclosed in the 
European patent application, then the above considerations apply only to 
that part. In such a case, option (i) mentioned in C-IX, 2.1 is not open to the 
third party and, regarding option C-IX, 2.1(ii), the new application must be 
confined to that part of the original subject-matter to which the third party 
has become entitled. Similarly, the original application must, for the 
designated states concerned, be confined to the subject-matter to which 
the original applicant remains entitled. The relationship between the new 
application and the amended original application will be similar to that 
between two divisional applications, and the relationship between each of 
those and the original application will be similar to that between divisional 
applications and the application from which they are divided. The guidance 
set out in C-IX, 1.4, 1.5 and 1.6 is therefore applicable to this situation. 
2.4 Entitlement for certain designated states only 
Where the final decision on entitlement applies to only certain designated 
states, the original application may contain different description, claims and 
drawings for those states compared with the others (see H-III, 4.1, last 
paragraph, and 4.3). 
If the sole result of the application of Art. 61(1) is to divide the right to the 
grant between the original applicant and the third party so that each may 
apply for the entire subject-matter for different designated states, each 
application should be examined in the normal way without regard to the 
other, with the proviso that the subject-matter of each application must not 
extend beyond that of the original application. 
3. Applications where a reservation has been entered in accordance 
with Art. 167(2)(a) EPC 1973 
See H-III, 4.4. 
4. International applications (Euro-PCT applications) 
For more details on these, see E-IX.  
Rule 18(1) 
Rule 18(2) 
 

Part D – Chapter I-1 
 
Chapter I – General remarks 
1. The meaning of opposition 
The public may oppose a granted European patent on the basis of one or 
more of the grounds mentioned in Art. 100. The grounds on which the 
opposition is based may arise for example from circumstances of which the 
EPO was not aware when the patent was granted (e.g. prior use or a 
publication which was not contained or not found among the material 
available to the EPO). Opposition is therefore a means by which any 
person (but see D-I, 4) may obtain the limitation or revocation of a wrongly 
granted patent. 
2. Opposition after surrender or lapse 
An opposition may be filed even if the European patent has been 
surrendered or has lapsed for all designated states. This is relevant in that 
in such cases the rights acquired with the patent remain in existence during 
the period up to surrender or lapse and claims arising from such rights may 
subsist after that date. 
3. Territorial effect of the opposition 
The opposition applies to the European patent in all the contracting states 
in which that patent has effect. Thus, the opposition has, in principle, to be 
in respect of all the designated states. If an opposition is filed in respect of 
only some of the designated states it will be treated as if it were in respect 
of all the designated states. 
Nevertheless, the effect of an opposition may differ as between contracting 
states. This may arise where the patent contains different claims for 
different contracting states in accordance with Rule 18(2) (see C-IX, 2.4), or 
where the claims must take account of different art under the provisions of 
Art. 54(3) and of Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 (see D-VII, 8). Amendments may also 
be occasioned by national rights of earlier date within the meaning of 
Art. 139(2) and Art. 140 (see H-II, 3.3 and H-III, 4.4). Thus, the patent may 
be differently amended in respect of different contracting states and may be 
revoked in respect of one or more contracting states and not in respect of 
others. 
4. Entitlement to oppose 
"Any person" may give notice of opposition without specifying any particular 
interest. "Any person" is to be construed in line with Art. 58 as meaning any 
natural person (private individual, self-employed persons, etc.), any legal 
person or any body assimilated to a legal person under the law governing 
it. "Any person" does not include the patent proprietor (see G 9/93, 
reversing G 1/84). 
Notice of opposition may also be filed jointly by more than one of the 
persons mentioned above. In order to safeguard the rights of the patent 
proprietor and in the interests of procedural efficiency, it has to be clear 
throughout the procedure who belongs to the group of common opponents. 
If a common opponent (including the common representative) intends to 
withdraw from the proceedings, the EPO must be notified accordingly by 
the common representative or by a new common representative 
Rule 75 
Art. 99(2) 
Art. 61 
Art. 139(2), Art. 140 
Art. 99(1) 
Part D – Chapter I-2 

 
 
determined under Rule 151(1) in order for the withdrawal to take effect (see 
also G 3/99). 
Oppositions are not assignable but may be inherited or succeeded to as 
part of an overall succession in law, e.g. in the event of the merger of legal 
persons (see G 4/88). Acquiring companies may also take over oppositions 
filed by acquired companies. However, a legal person who was a 
subsidiary of the opponent when the opposition was filed and who carries 
on the business to which the opposed patent relates cannot acquire the 
status of opponent if all its shares are assigned to another company 
(see G 2/04). 
The European Patent Office has to examine, ex officio, the validity of any 
purported transfer of opponent status to a new party at all stages of the 
proceedings (see T 1178/04). 
5. 
Intervention of the assumed infringer 
Under certain conditions (see D-VII, 6) third parties who prove that 
proceedings for infringement of the opposed patent have been instituted 
against them or that the patent proprietor has requested them to cease 
alleged infringement of the patent and that they have instituted proceedings 
for a court ruling that they are not infringing the patent may, after the 
opposition period has expired, intervene in the opposition proceedings. If 
the notice of intervention is filed in good time and in due form, the 
intervention is to be treated as an opposition (see D-IV, 5.6). For 
accelerated processing of oppositions on request, see D-VII, 1.2 and 
E-VIII, 5. 
6. 
Parties to opposition proceedings 
The patent proprietor, the opponent(s) and, where applicable, the 
intervener(s) will be parties to the opposition proceedings. However, an 
opponent who has withdrawn their opposition or whose opposition has 
been rejected as inadmissible will remain a party to the proceedings only 
until the date of such withdrawal or the date on which the decision on 
rejection has become final. The same will apply in the case of interveners. 
Third parties who have presented observations concerning the patentability 
of the invention in respect of which an application has been filed are not 
parties to opposition proceedings (see E-VI, 3). 
Where the patent proprietors are not the same in respect of different 
designated contracting states, they are to be regarded as joint patent 
proprietors for the purposes of opposition proceedings (see D-VII, 3.1 
concerning the unity of the European patent). 
Where evidence has been provided that in a contracting state, following a 
final decision, a person has been entered in the patent register of that state 
instead of the previous patent proprietor, this person is entitled on request 
to replace the previous patent proprietor in respect of that state. In this 
event, by derogation from Art. 118, the previous patent proprietor and the 
person making the request are not deemed to be joint patent proprietors 
unless both so request. The aim of this provision is to afford new patent 
proprietors the opportunity of defending themselves against the opposition 
Art. 105(1) and (2) 
Rule 89 
Art. 99(3) 
Art. 105(2) 
Art. 115 
Art. 118 
Art. 99(4) 
Art. 61(1)(a) 
 

Part D – Chapter I-3 
 
as they see fit (see D-VII, 3.2 as regards the conduct of the opposition 
proceedings in such cases). 
The Legal Division is responsible for decisions in respect of entries in the 
Register of European Patents (see the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
It is to be noted that a person who files two different notices of opposition to 
the same granted patent acquires party status as opponent only once 
(T 9/00). Two filings by the same opponent within the opposition period that 
individually are not admissible but taken together comply with Art. 99(1) 
and Rule 76 are considered as one admissible opposition (T 774/05; for a 
joint opposition, see D-I, 4). 
Multiple oppositions are dealt with in a single set of proceedings (see 
E-III, 6). When there are multiple opponents and/or proprietors as parties to 
a single opposition proceedings, it is normally appropriate to deal with all 
relevant issues (including e.g. admissibility of one of the oppositions, see 
D-IV, 5.5) when taking the final decision, e.g. during one oral proceedings 
(also see E-III, 6). The legal framework is defined by the sum of the 
statements of the extent to which the patent is opposed and by the grounds 
for opposition submitted and substantiated in the notices of opposition 
provided by each opponent. If one of the oppositions is admissible, but is 
later withdrawn, prejudicial grounds put forward in said opposition are 
generally examined by the opposition division of its own motion. If one of 
the oppositions is inadmissible, and provided at least one admissible 
opposition has been filed, the opposition division will consider of its own 
motion any prima facie relevant art cited in the inadmissible opposition (see 
D-V, 2.2). 
7. Representation 
As regards the requirements relating to representation of opponents and 
patent proprietors, reference is made to A-VIII, 1. Deficiencies in the 
representation of an opponent when filing the opposition and their remedy 
are dealt with in D-IV, 1.2.1(ii) and 1.2.2.2(iv). 
8. Information to the public 
As soon as an opposition has been received, the date of filing of the 
opposition is entered in the Register of European Patents and published in 
the European Patent Bulletin. The same applies to the date on which 
opposition proceedings are concluded and to the outcome of the 
proceedings (see also A-XI, 4). 
Art. 20(1) 
 

Part D – Chapter II-1 
 
Chapter II – The opposition division 
1. Administrative structure 
Each opposition division is assigned to an EPO directorate dedicated to 
conducting opposition proceedings. 
2. Composition 
2.1 Technically qualified members 
An opposition division consists of three technically qualified members, at 
least two of whom must not have taken part in the proceedings for grant of 
the patent to which the opposition relates. 
Participation in the proceedings for grant of the patent to which the 
opposition relates includes, in particular, performing a procedural act such 
as issuing a communication or signing a summons to oral proceedings. 
However, participation in the proceedings of a patent family member, e.g. a 
parent or priority application of the opposed patent, is not considered as 
participation in the proceedings for grant of the patent to which the 
opposition relates for the purposes of Art. 19(2). 
2.2 Legally qualified members 
If the opposition division considers that the nature of the decision so 
requires, it is enlarged by the addition of a legally qualified member who 
has not taken part in the proceedings for grant. 
The principles established for inclusion of a legally qualified member and 
for consultation of the Directorate Patent Law, the department responsible 
for providing legally qualified members for examining and opposition 
divisions, by the examining division apply mutatis mutandis to the 
opposition division (see C-VIII, 7). Difficult legal questions may also arise 
during the examination as to whether an opposition is to be rejected as 
inadmissible. In addition, consultation of a legally qualified member is to be 
envisaged in cases where it is questionable whether or not a disclosure by 
means other than a document was made available to the public. 
2.3 Chair 
The chair must be a technically qualified member who has not taken part in 
the grant proceedings (see D-II, 2.1). 
3. Allocation of duties and appointment of members of the 
opposition division 
C-II, 2 applies mutatis mutandis. 
4. Tasks of the opposition divisions 
4.1 Examination of oppositions 
The opposition divisions are responsible for the examination of oppositions 
against European patents. 
Rule 11(1) 
Art. 19(2) 
Art. 19(2) 
Rule 11(1) 
Art. 19(1) 
Part D – Chapter II-2 

 
 
The examination of newly submitted documents for compliance with 
physical requirements will essentially be the task of the competent 
formalities officers (see D-II, 7, A-I, 2, A-III, 3.2 and C-VIII, 1). 
4.2 Decision concerning the awarding of costs by the opposition 
division 
The opposition division will decide on requests to have the costs fixed by 
the formalities officer reviewed (see D-II, 7 and D-IX, 2.1). 
4.3 Ancillary proceedings 
It will be incumbent upon the opposition division to conduct ancillary 
proceedings arising in the course of opposition proceedings. Such ancillary 
proceedings may for example concern a request for re-establishment of 
rights in respect of a time limit which was not observed vis-à-vis the EPO 
during the opposition proceedings, a request for a decision concerning a 
finding arrived at by the formalities officer that a right has been lost or a 
request for exclusion from file inspection. Additional tasks may be entrusted 
to the opposition divisions by the President of the EPO in accordance with 
Rule 11(2). 
As regards exclusion from file inspection pursuant to Rule 144 in 
conjunction with the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, J.3, reference is made 
to A-XI, 2.1. Documents having a substantive and/or procedural bearing on 
opposition proceedings can only exceptionally be excluded from file 
inspection (T 1691/15). Communications dealing with a request for 
exclusion from file inspection are excluded from file inspection and are 
issued separately from communications dealing with other issues. 
Depending on its content, a document (provisionally) excluded from file 
inspection and any communication concerning a request for its exclusion 
from file inspection may be forwarded to the other party or parties 
(Rule 81(2)). As the public must be informed of the grounds prejudicing or 
supporting the maintenance of an opposed patent, only documents, or 
parts thereof, not (provisionally) excluded from file inspection can be used 
as evidence to prove or to refute a ground for opposition. 
If a party requests that the EPO excludes an otherwise public nonpatent 
literature document from file inspection for reasons of copyright, the 
opposition division will interpret this as a request not to make the document 
available to third parties in the public part of the file. This request, in the 
above interpretation, is normally granted if the copyright of the document in 
question is not owned by a party to the proceedings and the document in 
question is relatively easily retrievable including against payment. For 
example, a scientific article is usually easily retrievable, and its copyright is 
assigned to the editor. In contrast, a third-party company brochure is not 
easily retrievable. If the copyright of such company brochure is owned by a 
party to the proceedings, the request is refused by the opposition division 
and the document is made available via file inspection. 
Where the request not to make a document available via file inspection for 
reasons of copyright is acceded to by the opposition division, the page(s) 
carrying the bibliographic details of the non-patent literature document 
Art. 104(2) 
Rule 88(3) and (4) 
Art. 122(2) 
Rule 136(4) 
Rule 112(2) 
Rule 144 
 

Part D – Chapter II-3 
 
(normally the cover page) will nonetheless be made available via file 
inspection in order to ensure that members of the public are in a position to 
retrieve the entire document. The nonpatent literature document is not 
considered as being excluded from file inspection within the meaning of 
Rule 144 and can be used as evidence in the opposition proceedings. 
5. Allocation of tasks to members 
An opposition division will normally entrust one of its members with the 
examination of the opposition, but not with the conduct of oral proceedings, 
up to the time of the final decision on the opposition (see also D-IV, 2). If 
need be, the same member may also be entrusted with the examination of 
the evidence adduced (see E-IV, 1.3). This member will be referred to as 
the first member. 
6. Duties and powers of members 
The first member will conduct the examination of the opposition. If oral 
proceedings have been requested, they are normally arranged as first 
action, possibly in conjunction with the taking of evidence (see E-III, 1 
to E-III, 4 
and 
E-IV, 1.6.1). 
The 
first 
member 
will 
prepare 
the 
communication accompanying the summons to oral proceedings and 
submit it to the other members. If the first member considers that 
communications to the parties preceding the summons for oral proceedings 
are necessary, these communications will be submitted to the opposition 
division before despatch. 
If there are differences of opinion within the opposition division, the first 
member will confer with the other members to discuss the points at issue. 
The chair will preside at the meeting and, following a discussion, will take a 
vote on the decision or the further course of the procedure. 
Voting will be on the basis of a simple majority. In the event of parity of 
votes, the vote of the chair of the division is decisive. 
Any further measures necessary will as a rule be entrusted to the first 
member. If no further measures are necessary, the first member will draft a 
decision on the opposition and will distribute the draft to the other members 
of the opposition division for examination and signature. If any changes are 
proposed by a member and there are differences of opinion on such 
changes, the chair must arrange a meeting. 
Where reference is made hereinafter to the opposition division, this is to be 
taken to mean the first member where such a member has been appointed 
and in so far as the EPC entitles an opposition division member to act 
alone. 
7. Allocation of individual duties 
The President of the EPO may entrust to employees who are not 
technically or legally qualified the execution of individual duties falling to the 
examining divisions or to the opposition divisions and involving no technical 
or legal difficulties. In so far as such duties affect the public, their allocation 
will be notified in the Official Journal of the EPO (see decisions of the 
Art. 19(2) 
Rule 119(1) 
Art. 19(2) 
Rule 11(3) 
Part D – Chapter II-4 

 
 
President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, OJ EPO 2014, A6, and 
23 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A104). 
The formalities officers entrusted with these duties are also in charge of 
fixing the amount of the costs (see D-IX, 2.1). 
 

Part D – Chapter III-1 
 
Chapter III – Opposition 
1. Time allowed for filing notice of opposition 
Within nine months from the publication of the mention of the grant of the 
European patent, notice of opposition has to be given to the EPO in 
Munich, The Hague or Berlin. 
For expiry of the time limit see E-VIII, 1.4. Re-establishment of rights in 
respect of unobserved time limits for opposition is not possible in the case 
of an opponent (see, however, E-VIII, 3.1.2). 
2. Opposition fee 
The amount of the opposition fee specified in the Rules relating to Fees 
under the EPC must be paid before expiry of the time limit for opposition. 
An opposition filed in common by two or more persons, which otherwise 
meets the requirements of Art. 99 and Rules 3 and 76, is admissible on 
payment of only one opposition fee (see G 3/99). 
As regards the legal consequences and the procedure where the fee is not 
paid in good time, see D-IV, 1.2.1(i) and 1.4.1. 
3. Submission in writing 
3.1 Form of the opposition 
The notice of opposition must be filed in writing and must be typewritten or 
printed, with a margin of about 2.5 cm on the left-hand side of each page. It 
would be appropriate if the notice of opposition also satisfied the 
requirements laid down in Rule 49(2) in conjunction with the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113). 
3.2 Notices of opposition filed electronically 
Notice of opposition may, without prejudice to other means of filing, be filed 
in electronic form using EPO Online Filing (OLF) or Online Filing 2.0 . 
However, it may not be filed using the EPO webform filing service 
(OJ EPO 2021, A42). 
3.3 Notices of opposition filed by fax 
Notice of opposition may also be filed by fax (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A18). At the 
invitation of the EPO, written confirmation reproducing the contents of the 
fax and complying with the requirements of the Implementing Regulations – 
in particular properly signed – must be supplied. If the opponent fails to 
comply with this invitation in due time, the fax is deemed not to have been 
received (see A-VIII, 2.5). The opposition fee must in any case be paid 
within the opposition period. 
3.4 Signature of the notice of opposition 
The notice of opposition must be signed by the person responsible, i.e. by 
the opponent or, where appropriate, by the representative (see also 
D-IV, 1.2.1(ii), and A-VIII, 1). 
Art. 99(1) 
Art. 99(1) 
Rule 86 
Rule 50(2) 
Rule 49(2) 
Rule 76(1) 
Rule 2 
Rule 50(3) 
Rule 2 
Part D – Chapter III-2 

 
 
Initials or other abbreviated forms will not be accepted as a signature. 
Where the notice of opposition is filed in electronic form, the signature may 
take the form of a facsimile signature or a text string signature (i.e. a type-
written signature that is preceded and followed by a forward slash (/)). 
Where EPO Online Filing is used, the signature may also take the form of 
an enhanced electronic signature (see OJ EPO 2023, A48). 
Where the notice of opposition is filed by fax, the reproduction on the 
facsimile of the signature of the person filing the notice of opposition will be 
considered sufficient. 
If the signature is omitted, the formalities officer must request the party, or 
where appropriate the representative, to affix their signature within a time 
limit to be laid down by the formalities officer. If signed in due time, the 
document retains its original date of receipt; otherwise, it is deemed not to 
have been received (see D-IV, 1.2.1(ii) and 1.4.1). 
4. 
Derogations from language requirements 
Derogations from language requirements for written opposition proceedings 
are dealt with in A-VII, 3 (for documents filed as evidence, see A-VII, 3.4) 
and for oral opposition proceedings in E-V. 
5. 
Grounds for opposition 
A written reasoned statement of the grounds for opposition must be filed 
within the opposition period. 
Opposition may only be filed on the grounds that: 
(i) 
the subject-matter of the European patent is not patentable under 
Art. 52 to 57, because it 
– 
is not new (Art. 52(1), 54, 55), 
– 
does not involve an inventive step (Art. 52(1), 56), 
– 
is not susceptible of industrial application (Art. 52(1), 57), 
– 
is not regarded as an invention under Art. 52(1) to (3), or 
– 
is not patentable under Art. 53; 
(ii) 
the European patent does not disclose the invention in a manner 
sufficiently clear and complete for it to be carried out by a person 
skilled in the art (see Art. 83); 
Art. 99(1) 
Rule 76(1) 
Art. 100 
Art. 100(a) 
Art. 100(b) 
 

Part D – Chapter III-3 
 
(iii) 
the subject-matter of the European patent extends beyond the 
content of the application as filed (see Art. 123(2)) or, if the patent 
was granted on a divisional application or on a new application filed 
under Art. 61 (new application in respect of the invention by the 
person adjudged in a final decision to be entitled to the grant of a 
European patent), beyond the content of the earlier application as 
filed (see Art. 76(1)). 
(See also D-V, 3, D-V, 4 and D-V, 6). 
Note that each single condition mentioned above forms an individual legal 
basis for objection to the maintenance of the patent. Consequently, each 
such condition is to be regarded as a separate ground for opposition 
(see G 1/95 and G 7/95). 
The following allegations, for example, do not constitute grounds for 
opposition: that national rights of earlier date exist which put the 
patentability of the invention in question (see, however, H-III, 4.4), that the 
patent proprietor is not entitled to the European patent, that the 
subject-matter of the patent lacks unity, that the claims are not supported 
by the description (unless it is also argued that the claims are so broadly 
worded that the description in the specification does not sufficiently disclose 
the subject-matter within the meaning of Art. 100(b)), that the form and 
content of the description or drawings of the patent do not comply with the 
provisions as to formal requirements as set forth in Rules 42 and 49(2) in 
conjunction with the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
25 November 2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113), or that the designation of the 
inventor is incorrect. Nor does the simple allegation that priority has been 
wrongly claimed constitute a ground for opposition. However, the matter of 
priority must be subjected to a substantial examination in the course of 
opposition proceedings if prior art is invoked in connection with a ground for 
opposition under Art. 100(a) in relation to which the priority date is of 
decisive importance (see G-IV, 3 and F-VI, 2). 
6. Content of the notice of opposition 
The notice of opposition, filed in a written reasoned statement, must 
contain: 
(i) 
the name, address and nationality of the opponent and the state in 
which the opponent's residence or principal place of business is 
located. Names of natural persons must be indicated by the person's 
family name and given name(s), the family name being indicated 
before the given name(s). Names of legal entities, as well as 
companies considered to be legal entities by reason of the legislation 
to which they are subject, must be indicated by their official 
designations. Addresses must be indicated in such a way as to 
satisfy the customary requirements for prompt postal delivery at the 
indicated address. They must comprise all the relevant administrative 
units, including the house number, if any. Opponents (whether 
natural or legal persons) whose residence or principal place of 
business is in an EPC contracting state and who act without a 
professional representative can use an address for correspondence 
Art. 100(c) 
Rule 76(2)(a) 
Rule 41(2)(c) 
Part D – Chapter III-4 

 
 
other than their residence. The address for correspondence must be 
the opponent's own address. Post cannot be sent to a different 
(natural or legal) person, since that requires a valid form of 
representation under Art. 133 and Art. 134. It is recommended that 
the 
telephone 
number 
be 
indicated 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.2(i) 
and D-IV, 1.4.2); 
(ii) 
the number of the European patent against which opposition is filed, 
the name of the patent proprietor and the title of the invention 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.2(ii) and 1.4.2); 
(iii) 
a statement of the extent to which the European patent is opposed 
and of the grounds on which the opposition is based as well as an 
indication of the facts and evidence presented in support of these 
grounds 
(see 
D-IV, 1.2.2.1(iii) to 1.2.2.1(v) 
and 1.4.2). 
The 
requirement under Rule 76(1) that notice of opposition must be filed 
in a written reasoned statement also implies presenting arguments. 
However, in order to streamline opposition procedure, it is 
recommended that a single copy of any written evidence be 
submitted as soon as possible and ideally with the notice of 
opposition (see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v), last two paragraphs); 
(iv) 
if the opponent has appointed a representative, the representative's 
name and address of place of business in accordance with the 
provisions of subparagraph (i) as set out above (see D-IV, 1.2.2.2(iii) 
and 1.4.2). 
D-IV, 1 sets out further details and explains how to deal with the opposition 
if one of these requirements is not fulfilled. 
Rule 76(2)(b) 
Rule 76(1) 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
Rule 76(2)(d) 
 

Part D – Chapter IV-1 
 
Chapter IV – Procedure up to substantive 
examination 
1. Examination for deficiencies in the notice of opposition and 
communications from the formalities officer arising from this 
examination 
1.1 Forwarding of the notice of opposition to the formalities officer 
The notice of opposition must be forwarded directly to the formalities 
officer, who then places it in the electronic file of the European patent 
concerned in accordance with the relevant administrative instructions and 
communicates it without delay to the patent proprietor for information. If a 
notice of opposition is received prior to the publication of the mention of the 
grant of the European patent, the formalities officer informs the senders 
that their document cannot be treated as an opposition. This document 
becomes part of the file and, as such, is also available for inspection under 
Art. 128(4), and is brought to the attention of the applicant or the patent 
proprietor as an observation by a third party in accordance with Art. 115 (for 
details, see E-VI, 3). If an opposition fee has been paid, it will in this case 
be refunded. 
Examinations, observations, communications and, where appropriate, 
invitations to the parties will be the responsibility of the formalities officer 
who has been entrusted with this task of the opposition division 
(see D-II, 7). 
1.2 Examination for deficiencies in the notice of opposition 
After notice of opposition has been given, the formalities officer examines 
whether any deficiencies exist. 
1.2.1 Deficiencies which, if not remedied, lead to the opposition 
being deemed not to have been filed 
The following deficiencies fall into this category: 
(i) 
the opposition fee or a sufficient amount of the fee has not been paid 
within the opposition period (Art. 99(1); see also G 1/18). However, if 
the opposition fee, apart from a small amount (e.g. deducted as bank 
charges), has been paid within the opposition period, the formalities 
officer examines whether the amount lacking can be overlooked 
where this is justified. If the formalities officer concludes that the 
amount lacking can be overlooked, the opposition fee is deemed to 
have been paid and there is no deficiency in the present sense; 
(ii) 
the document giving notice of opposition is not signed and this is not 
rectified within the period set by the formalities officer, which is fixed 
at two months as a rule (see E-VIII, 1.2) (Rule 50(3)). 
It is noted that for cases covered by Art. 133(2) (see also 
D-IV, 1.2.2.2(iv)) a professional representative first has to be 
appointed within the prescribed time limit. The above applies if the 
Art. 7 RFees 
Art. 8 RFees 
Part D – Chapter IV-2 

 
 
appointed representative then fails to remedy such deficiency either 
by signing the notice or by approving it in writing; 
(iii) 
where a notice of opposition is filed by fax and written confirmation 
reproducing the contents of the fax, if requested by the formalities 
officer, is not supplied in due time (Rule 2(1) and decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 20 February 2019, OJ EPO 2019, A18); 
(iv) 
where a notice of opposition is filed by the representative or 
employee of an opponent, and the authorisation, if any is required 
(see A-VIII, 1.5 and the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
12 July 2007, Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, L.1), is not 
supplied in due time (Rule 152(1) to (3) and (6)); and 
(v) 
the opposition is submitted within the opposition period but not in an 
official language of the EPO, as specified in Rule 3(1), or if Art. 14(4) 
applies to the opponent, the translation of the elements referred to in 
Rule 76(2)(c) is not submitted within the opposition period (see also 
A-VII, 2, G 6/91 and T 193/87). This period is extended where the 
one-month period as required under Rule 6(2) expires later. This 
deficiency is present if the opposition is not filed in English, French or 
German or if, for example, an opponent from Belgium files an 
opposition in time in Dutch but fails to file the translation of the 
essential elements into English, French or German within the 
abovementioned time limits. 
For oppositions which, upon submission, are deemed not to have been filed 
because of deficiencies as described above, see the further procedure as 
described in D-IV, 1.3.1, 1.3.3 and 1.4.1. 
1.2.2 Deficiencies which, if not remedied, lead to the opposition 
being rejected as inadmissible 
Only such oppositions as are deemed to have been filed will be examined 
for deficiencies under Rule 77(1) and (2). 
If the formalities officers are not sure whether the opposition in question 
contains a deficiency under Rule 76(2)(c), they will submit the file to the 
opposition division for checking. They will do this in particular if the 
opposition alleges non-patentability under Art. 52, 54 or 56 and the relevant 
prior art has been made available to the public by means other than by 
written description, or if taking of evidence has been requested in 
accordance with Rule 117. 
In this connection the opposition division will also examine the extent to 
which it is necessary for the formalities officer to request the opponent to 
submit evidence (see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v)). 
1.2.2.1 Deficiencies under Rule 77(1) 
The following deficiencies fall into this category: 
(i) 
the notice of opposition is not filed in writing with the EPO in Munich 
or its branch at The Hague or its suboffice in Berlin within the nine-
 

Part D – Chapter IV-3 
 
month opposition period, calculated from the date of publication of 
the mention of the grant of the European patent in the European 
Patent Bulletin (Art. 99(1)); 
Accordingly, the opposition is deficient if, for example, notice of 
opposition is submitted to the EPO belatedly, i.e. after expiry of the 
nine-month period, or where the opposition is notified within the 
opposition period but only verbally in a telephone call officially noted 
in the files. This category of deficiency also includes oppositions 
which, notwithstanding Art. 99(1), are filed with the central industrial 
property office of a contracting state or an authority thereunder and 
not forwarded by these offices either at all or in time for them to be 
received by the EPO before the expiry of the opposition period. 
There is no legal obligation upon these offices or authorities to 
forward oppositions to the EPO. 
(ii) 
the notice of opposition does not provide sufficient identification of 
the European patent against which opposition is filed; 
Such a deficiency exists if the EPO is unable to identify the relevant 
patent on the basis of the particulars in the notice of opposition; for 
example, if only the proprietor of the contested patent and perhaps 
the title of the invention for which the patent was granted are 
mentioned in the notice of opposition. Such particulars alone are not 
an adequate description of the contested European patent, unless 
the patent proprietor who alone is named possesses only one patent 
or possesses several patents, the subject-matter of only one of which 
fits the title of the invention given in the notice of opposition, being 
clearly distinct from the subject-matter of the other patents which this 
proprietor holds. A mere indication of the number of the contested 
European patent in the notice of opposition constitutes sufficient 
identification of the patent concerned, provided that no conflicting 
information is given, e.g. an inconsistent name for the patent 
proprietor, and the conflict cannot be resolved from the information 
given. 
(iii) 
the notice of opposition contains no statement of the extent to which 
the European patent is opposed; 
Such a deficiency is present if it is not clear from the requisite 
statement whether the opposition is directed against the entire 
subject-matter of the patent or only a part of it, i.e. whether it is 
directed against all the claims or only against one or a part of one 
claim, such as an alternative or embodiment; 
(iv) 
the notice of opposition contains no statement of the grounds on 
which the opposition is based; 
A notice of opposition contains such a deficiency if it does not 
mention at least one of the grounds for opposition referred to in 
Art. 100 (see D-III, 5). If non-patentability is given as a ground for 
opposition, the statement of grounds must at least implicitly indicate 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
Part D – Chapter IV-4 

 
 
which conditions for patentability (Art. 52 to 57) are considered not to 
have been fulfilled. 
(v) 
the notice of opposition is not adequately substantiated; 
According to Rule 76(2)(c), a notice of opposition has to contain a 
statement of the extent to which the European patent is opposed, the 
grounds on which the opposition is based, as well as an indication of 
the facts and evidence presented in support of these grounds for 
opposition. 
The wording of Rule 76(2)(c) clearly indicates that there is a 
difference between the grounds for opposition, i.e. the legal basis for 
revocation of the patent (e.g. Art. 100(a)), and the facts and evidence 
presented in support of these grounds. Where the facts and evidence 
are entirely absent or so vague as not to allow a proper 
understanding of the case, the opposition is considered to contain 
only a mere allegation, which is not sufficient to render the opposition 
admissible. 
Therefore, the opponent has to substantiate the grounds for 
opposition by adducing facts, evidence and arguments for at least 
one of those grounds. The opponent has to establish the legal and 
factual framework on which the opposition rests to pave the way for a 
substantive assessment. As a consequence, the division and the 
patent proprietor need to be able to understand, without further 
investigation of their own, the issues that need to be decided. It is not 
necessary for the admissibility of the opposition that a final decision 
can be taken without further investigation. In other words, it is not a 
question of admissibility but of substantive examination whether the 
facts on which the opponent relies in comprehensibly explaining a 
ground for opposition are or can be proven.  
Where the grounds comprise an allegation of a prior use or an oral 
disclosure prior to the date of filing or the priority date, the opposition 
division must be supplied with an indication of the facts, evidence 
and arguments necessary to determine 
(a) 
the date on which the alleged use occurred ("when"), 
(b) 
what was used ("what"), 
(c) 
and the circumstances relating to the use ("where, how, by 
whom") (G-IV, 7.2 and 7.3). 
Where there are multiple grounds for opposition, if the facts, 
evidence and arguments for one ground are sufficiently indicated, the 
opposition is admissible even if the facts, evidence and arguments in 
support of the other grounds are submitted belatedly. Such belated 
facts, evidence and arguments are in that event dealt with in 
accordance with E-VI, 2. Owing to the length of the opposition period 
(nine months), however, in order to expedite the opposition 
Art. 99(1) 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
 

Part D – Chapter IV-5 
 
proceedings, it is recommended that a single copy of any written 
evidence indicated in the notice of opposition be submitted as soon 
as possible and ideally with the notice of opposition. 
Otherwise, if the opposition is admissible, the opponent will be invited 
to supply such evidence as soon as possible and as a rule within two 
months. If the documents thus requested are neither enclosed nor 
filed within the time limit set, the opposition division may decide not 
to take into account any arguments based on them. (As regards facts 
or evidence not submitted in due time and arguments presented at a 
late stage see E-VI, 2). 
As far as the admissibility of an opposition is concerned, it is 
immaterial whether and to what extent the facts, evidence and 
arguments submitted in due time actually warrant revocation of the 
contested European patent or its maintenance in amended form. On 
the one hand, an unconvincing ground for opposition may have been 
substantiated (making the opposition admissible), whereas on the 
other hand a deficient submission may have been rejected as 
inadmissible even though, if properly drafted, it could have 
succeeded (see also T 222/85). 
The substantiation of the grounds for opposition thus has to be 
clearly distinguished from the actual assessment of the evidence, 
which is part of the process of ascertaining whether the opposition is 
well-founded in substance, i.e. proven. Subject to the admissibility of 
the opposition, this has to be established by the opposition division in 
the light of the applicable standard of proof (G-IV, 7.5.2). 
(vi) 
the opposition does not indicate beyond any doubt the identity of the 
person filing the opposition (Art. 99(1) and Rule 76(2)(a)). 
1.2.2.2 Deficiencies under Rule 77(2) 
The following deficiencies fall within this category: 
(i) 
the notice of opposition does not specify the name, address and 
nationality of the opponent and the state in which the opponent's 
residence or principal place of business is located in the prescribed 
manner (see D-III, 6(i)); 
(ii) 
the number of the European patent against which the opposition is 
filed or the name of the patent proprietor or the title of the invention is 
not indicated; 
Each of the particulars listed in (ii) above must be supplied within the 
time limit set by the formalities officer (see D-IV, 1.3.2), even if the 
contested European patent may be identified by means of one of 
these 
or 
other 
particulars 
within 
the 
opposition 
period 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(ii)). If the name of the patent proprietor as 
indicated by the opponent is not the same as that recorded in the 
Register, the formalities officer will inform the opponent of the patent 
proprietor's correct name. 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
Rule 83 
Art. 99(1) 
Rule 76(2)(a) 
Rule 76(2)(a) 
Rule 76(2)(b) 
Part D – Chapter IV-6 

 
 
(iii) 
where the opponent has appointed a representative, the name or the 
address of the place of business of such representative is not 
indicated in the notice of opposition in the prescribed manner 
(see D-III, 6(iv)); 
(iv) 
the opponent has neither residence nor principal place of business in 
one of the contracting states (Art. 133(2)) and has not communicated 
the appointment of a professional representative (Art. 134). In the 
communication requesting remedy of such deficiency the opponent 
must also be asked to arrange for the signature or approval of the 
notice of opposition by the representative to be appointed; and 
(v) 
the notice of opposition fails to satisfy further formal requirements 
other than those mentioned in Rule 77(1). For instance, it may fail to 
comply with the provisions of Rule 50(2) without due justification. 
1.3 Issue of communications by the formalities officer as a result of 
examination for deficiencies 
If, in the course of the examination as described in D-IV, 1.2, formalities 
officers note deficiencies which may still be remedied, and if there are no 
deficiencies which may no longer be remedied (in the case of deficiencies 
which may no longer be remedied see D-IV, 1.4), they will issue the 
communications described in D-IV, 1.3.1 and/or 1.3.2 to the opponent, if 
possible in a single communication. 
1.3.1 Communication in the event of deficiencies as described in 
D-IV, 1.2.1 which, if not remedied, will lead to the opposition being 
deemed not to have been filed 
The communication will indicate the deficiencies noted in accordance 
with D-IV, 1.2.1 and will state that the opposition will be deemed not to 
have been filed unless the deficiency or deficiencies are remedied within 
the time limits indicated in D-IV, 1.2.1. 
1.3.2 Communication in the event of deficiencies as described in 
D-IV, 1.2.2 which, if not remedied, will lead to rejection of the 
opposition as inadmissible 
The communication will indicate the deficiencies noted in accordance 
with D-IV, 1.2.2.1 or 1.2.2.2 and will state that the opposition will be 
rejected 
as 
inadmissible 
unless 
the 
deficiencies 
as 
described 
in D-IV, 1.2.2.1 are remedied within the opposition period and unless the 
deficiencies as described in D-IV, 1.2.2.2 are remedied within the period 
stipulated by the formalities officer. 
1.3.3 Extent of the formalities officer's obligation to issue the above 
communications 
Although formalities officers are not obliged to do so, they may notify the 
opponent of deficiencies as described in D-IV, 1.2.1(i) and D-IV, 1.2.2.1 in 
good time before the expiry of the time limits within which it is still possible 
to remedy the deficiencies. However, the opponent can seek no legal 
remedy against failure to issue these communications, which is to be 
regarded merely as a service afforded the opponent by the EPO so as 
Rule 76(2)(d) 
Rule 86 
Art. 14(4) 
Rule 2(1) 
Rule 3(1) 
Rule 6(2) 
Rule 50(3) 
Rule 77(1) and (2) 
Rule 152(1) to (3) 
 

Part D – Chapter IV-7 
 
largely to obviate any adverse legal consequences. Deficiencies as 
described in D-IV, 1.2.1(ii) and 1.2.2.2 must in any event be officially 
notified to the opponent, since this is a statutory requirement. Should this 
communication inadvertently be omitted notwithstanding deficiencies of this 
type in the notice of opposition, opponents may submit the missing 
particulars on their own initiative at any time, even after the expiry of the 
opposition period without suffering adverse legal consequences. 
1.4 Subsequent procedure in the event of deficiencies which may no 
longer be remedied 
1.4.1 Deficiencies which may no longer be remedied, as a result of 
which the opposition is deemed not to have been filed 
If formalities officers establish that the deficiencies referred to in D-IV, 1.2.1 
have not been remedied within the time limits laid down in the EPC or by 
the EPO, they will inform the opponent in accordance with Art. 119 that the 
notice of opposition is deemed not to have been filed and that a decision 
may be applied for under Rule 112(2) (see E-VIII, 1.9.3). If no such 
application is made within the prescribed period of two months after 
notification of this communication, and if there is no other valid opposition 
pending, the proceedings are closed and the parties informed accordingly. 
Any opposition fees which have been paid are refunded. 
Documents submitted with a notice of opposition which is deemed not to 
have been filed will form part of the file and will thus be available for 
inspection in accordance with Art. 128(4). They will be regarded as 
observations by third parties under Art. 115 (see in this connection D-V, 2.2 
and E-VI, 3). If a further admissible opposition is pending, the proceedings 
are continued in respect of it. 
1.4.2 Deficiencies which may no longer be remedied in accordance 
with Rule 77(1) and (2), resulting in the opposition being rejected as 
inadmissible 
If there are no deficiencies of the type referred to in D-IV, 1.4.1 but a notice 
of opposition which is deemed to have been filed reveals deficiencies under 
Rule 77(1) (see D-IV, 1.2.2.1) which may no longer be remedied and which 
have not been communicated to the opponent(s) in accordance 
with D-IV, 1.3.2 (because the opposition period has already expired), the 
formalities officer must, by virtue of Art. 113(1), notify the opponent(s) of 
these deficiencies, allowing them time in which to submit comments 
(normally two months), and point out to them that the notice of opposition is 
likely to be rejected as inadmissible. 
If the opponent  
– 
does not successfully refute the opinion expressed by the formalities 
officer on the existence of deficiencies under Rule 77(1) that may no 
longer be corrected or  
– 
has failed to remedy in good time deficiencies that may be corrected 
(Rule 77(2)) and that were communicated to them pursuant 
to D-IV, 1.3.2,  
Rule 112(1) 
Part D – Chapter IV-8 

 
 
the formalities officer will reject the notice of opposition as inadmissible, 
except in the case mentioned in D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v) (for which the opposition 
division is competent to decide, see the decisions of the President of the 
EPO dated 12 December 2013 and 23 November 2015 concerning the 
entrustment to non-examining staff of certain duties incumbent on the 
examining 
or 
opposition 
divisions, 
OJ EPO 2014, A6, and 
OJ EPO 2015, A104). As regards the form of the decision, see E-X, 2.3 and 
E-X, 2.6. 
However, if the opponent has requested oral proceedings or a further 
admissible opposition is pending, the formalities officer will submit the 
opposition documents to the directorate responsible for the European 
patent in suit (for designation of an opposition division, see D-IV, 2). 
The decision declaring the opposition inadmissible under Rule 77(1) or (2) 
can be taken without the participation of the patent proprietor in accordance 
with Rule 77(3). However, for reasons of procedural economy, the 
substantive examination is in fact initiated if at least one further admissible 
opposition is pending. The patent proprietor may also comment on the 
admissibility of the former opposition in the course of that examination. 
When the decision declaring the opposition inadmissible has become final 
the opponent concerned is no longer a party to the proceedings. 
1.5 Notifications to and observations by the patent proprietor 
Communications and decisions in the course of the examination as to 
whether the opposition is deemed to have been filed and is admissible are 
also notified to the patent proprietors for information. They may file 
observations on their own initiative concerning such a communication. 
1.6 Subsequent procedure 
For the subsequent procedure in the event of one or more oppositions with 
no deficiencies see D-IV, 5.2. 
2. 
Activity of the opposition division 
Formalities officers submit the file to the opposition division in question on 
despatch of the invitation to the proprietor to submit comments in the cases 
referred to in D-IV, 5.2; in all other cases (see D-IV, 1.4.2) they submit it 
immediately. 
The director responsible will then designate the three technical members of 
the competent opposition division. The opposition division will decide 
whether one of its members – and if so, which – is to be entrusted with the 
examination of the opposition up to the taking of a decision (see D-II, 5). 
The technical members of the division will not be designated if the 
opposition is rejected as inadmissible by the formalities officer and no 
further admissible opposition has been filed (see D-IV, 1.4.2). 
3. 
Rejection of the opposition as inadmissible by the opposition 
division, the patent proprietor not being a party 
(For rejection of the opposition as inadmissible at a later stage, the patent 
proprietor being a party, see D-IV, 5.1 and 5.5). 
Art. 19(2) 
 

Part D – Chapter IV-9 
 
In cases of insufficient substantiation, where the formalities officer is not 
competent to decide on the inadmissibility (see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v)), the 
opposition division will either: 
(i) 
issue the decision rejecting the opposition as inadmissible (when the 
formalities officer has already informed the opponent of this 
deficiency pursuant to D-IV, 1.3.2); or 
(ii) 
consider the opposition admissible and continue with examination of 
the opposition (see D-V); or 
(iii) 
communicate its findings to the opponent(s) in question and at the 
same time request them to submit observations. 
If the opponent does not successfully refute the opinion expressed by the 
opposition division on the existence of these deficiencies which may no 
longer be corrected, the opposition division will reject the notice of 
opposition as inadmissible, possibly after having held oral proceedings. As 
regards the form of the decision, see E-X, 2.3 and E-X, 2.6. 
The decision will be communicated to the other parties. An inadmissible 
opposition or documents produced in support of an inadmissible opposition 
will be placed in the file and will therefore be available for inspection in 
accordance with Art. 128(4). As regards the possibility of taking them into 
consideration as observations by third parties, see D-V, 2.2 and E-VI, 3. If 
there are further admissible oppositions, for reasons of procedural 
economy this decision to reject the opposition as inadmissible will normally 
be taken at the end of the procedure together with the decision on the 
admissible oppositions. 
For the possibility of appeal by the opponent and other possible means of 
redress, see E-XII, 1 and E-XII, 7. 
4. Termination of opposition proceedings in the event of 
inadmissible opposition 
Under Art. 101(1) and Rule 79(1), the examination as to whether the 
European patent can be maintained can only be performed if at least one 
admissible opposition has been filed. This means that the opposition 
division has to refrain from commenting on the substantive merits of the 
opposition when expressing an opinion on its inadmissibility if there is no 
further admissible opposition (see T 925/91). Opposition proceedings are 
terminated if all notices of opposition filed against a European patent have 
been rejected as inadmissible and the last decision in this respect has 
become final. This will be communicated to the parties. 
5. Preparation of substantive examination 
5.1 Inadmissibility at a later stage 
The admissibility of the opposition must be examined ex officio in every 
phase of the proceedings. In particular, the opposition division examines 
whether 
the 
notice 
of 
opposition 
is 
adequately 
substantiated 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v)). 
Part D – Chapter IV-10 

 
 
Since the admissibility of an opposition is always open to question by the 
patent proprietor, no separate communication that the opposition is 
admissible will be sent to the opponent or the patent proprietor. Where 
deficiencies on the basis of which the notice of opposition is likely to be 
regarded as inadmissible, but of which the opponent has not been informed 
by the formalities officer, come to the attention of the opposition division in 
the opposition documents submitted to it or because the patent proprietor 
has raised the issue during the proceedings, it will inform the parties about 
its reservations in a communication and at the same time request the 
opponent in question to submit observations. If deficiencies within the 
meaning of Rule 77(2) are involved, it is sufficient to specify a period for the 
opponent to remedy such deficiencies. 
If the opponent does not successfully refute the opinion expressed by the 
opposition division on the existence of these deficiencies which may no 
longer be corrected or fails to remedy in good time deficiencies which may 
be corrected, the opposition division will reject the notice of opposition as 
inadmissible, possibly after having held oral proceedings. As regards the 
form of the decision, see E-X, 2.3 and E-X, 2.6. For subsequent procedure, 
see the last two paragraphs of D-IV, 3. 
5.2 Invitation to the patent proprietor to submit comments and 
communication of opposition to the other parties concerned by the 
formalities officer 
If formalities officers consider that no further ex-officio objection to the 
admissibility of each or the only opposition remains, they will invite the 
patent proprietor, immediately after expiry of the opposition period or the 
period laid down by the formalities officer for the remedying of the 
deficiencies in accordance with Rule 77(2) (see D-IV, 1.2.2.2), or for the 
presentation of evidence (see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v)), to file observations 
concerning the oppositions communicated earlier and to file amendments, 
where appropriate, to the description, claims and drawings within a four-
month period. Extension of the time limit will only be granted in exceptional 
cases on the basis of a duly substantiated request (see E-VIII, 1.6, and the 
notice from the EPO dated 31 May 2016, OJ EPO 2016, A42). The above 
procedure also applies to oppositions where a decision to the effect that 
they are deemed not to have been filed or are inadmissible has not yet 
been taken or has not yet become final. 
If several notices of opposition have been filed, the formalities officer will 
communicate them to the other opponent(s) at the same time as the 
communication provided for in the previous paragraph. This will not be 
combined with an invitation to file observations or the setting of a time limit. 
However, copies of documents supporting the parties' submissions which 
are available for inspection via the Register will no longer be transmitted 
(see A-XI, 2 and the notice from the EPO dated 28 August 2020, 
OJ EPO 2020, A106). 
5.3 Filing of amended documents in reply to the notice of opposition 
Amended documents must, provided that it is not irrelevant at the stage 
reached in the procedure, be as complete as possible and drawn up in 
Rule 79(1) and (2) 
 

Part D – Chapter IV-11 
 
such a way as to allow the European patent, where appropriate, to be 
maintained without further delay in the amended version. 
These considerations apply also to auxiliary requests in which the patent 
proprietor proposes amendments for consideration by the opposition 
division only if the division is unable to grant the main request, for example 
that the opposition is to be rejected. In both cases, however, it will be more 
convenient in certain circumstances to determine first the form of the 
claims, leaving purely consequential amendments in the description to be 
dealt with later (see D-V, 5). 
Care must be taken to ensure that any amendments do not offend against 
Art. 123(2) and (3) (see D-V, 6, H-IV, 5.3 and H-V, 2 and 3). It must also be 
checked that the patent, by the amendments themselves, does not 
contravene the requirements of the EPC (with the exception of Art. 82, 
see D-V, 2.2). 
Amendments of the description in opposition should be carried out by 
submitting amended paragraphs replacing specific numbered paragraphs 
of the B publication of the patent. This allows the opposition division and 
the opponents to verify the amendments efficiently. For reasons of 
procedural economy, the filing of a completely retyped description should 
be avoided (see H-III, 2.3). See also H-III, 2.2 to 2.4 for the form of 
amended documents.  
Proprietors' observations, and any amendments they make, are 
communicated to the opponent(s) by the formalities officer without delay for 
information. No time limit for reply is set. 
5.4 Communication of observations from one of the parties to the 
other parties 
The formalities officer will, at any stage in the procedure, immediately 
communicate the observations of any of the parties to the other parties for 
information. However, copies of documents supporting the parties' 
submissions, which are available for inspection via the Register, will no 
longer be transmitted (see also D-IV, 5.2, A-XI, 2 and the notice from the 
EPO dated 28 August 2020, OJ EPO 2020, A106). 
If the opposition division considers that observations are called for in the 
course of the further procedure, a separate invitation is issued and a period 
is fixed (normally four months), with or without a communication stating the 
grounds. 
5.5 Decision concerning the admissibility of an opposition, the 
patent proprietor being a party 
If the patent proprietor, when replying to the notice of opposition, contends 
that the opposition is inadmissible pursuant to Rule 77(1) and (2) because 
of deficiencies specified by the patent proprietor himself, the opponent 
concerned must be given the opportunity to submit comments within a 
period fixed by the formalities officer (normally two months). 
Rule 79(3) 
Rule 81(2) 
Part D – Chapter IV-12 

 
 
If the opposition division concludes that the opposition is inadmissible, it 
must as a rule first take a reasoned decision, possibly after having held oral 
proceedings. This decision is appealable. If, on the other hand, on the basis 
of another – admissible – opposition against the same patent, a final 
decision with regard to all substantive issues can be taken, the decision on 
admissibility is to be taken together with this final decision. 
If, despite the observations of the patent proprietor, the opposition division 
concludes that the opposition is admissible, the decision on admissibility is 
normally to be taken together with the final decision, especially where at 
least one other admissible opposition exists (see D-I, 6). If the opposition 
division is of the opinion that all oppositions are inadmissible, a reasoned 
decision is to be taken, which is appealable. 
An opponent whose opposition has been finally rejected as inadmissible is 
no longer a party to the subsequent proceedings once this decision 
becomes final. 
5.6 Examination of the admissibility of an intervention and 
preparations in the event of an intervention 
When examining whether an intervention is admissible, the formalities 
officer and the opposition division will proceed as for the examination as to 
admissibility of an opposition (see D-IV, 1, 3 and 5.5) but on the basis of 
the requirements for intervention under Art. 105 and Rule 89. 
Paragraphs D-IV, 5.2 and 5.4, may, however, be disregarded in the case of 
an intervention in opposition proceedings. 
Accordingly, particularly in the case of proceedings which are at an 
advanced stage, the formalities officer will inform third parties who have 
intervened of the progress of the proceedings and request them to indicate 
within one month whether they will also require the documents received 
from the parties in accordance with Rule 79(1) to (3), together with the 
communications from the opposition division and the observations of the 
parties under Rule 81(2), for the preceding period. If this is the case, the 
formalities officer will send them with the relevant communications from the 
opposition division or the formalities officer to the intervening third party. 
Rule 79(4) 
Rule 86 
 

Part D – Chapter V-1 
 
Chapter V – Substantive examination of 
opposition 
1. Beginning of the examination of the opposition 
Once the preparations for the examination of the opposition have been 
completed pursuant to Rule 79, the opposition division examines whether 
the grounds for opposition (see D-III, 5) laid down in Art. 100 prejudice the 
maintenance of the European patent. The examination may also begin if a 
single admissible opposition has been withdrawn in the interim 
(see D-VII, 5.3). If the opponent has died or is legally incapacitated, the 
examination may begin even without the participation of the heirs or legal 
representatives (see D-VII, 5.2). 
2. Extent of the examination 
2.1 Extent to which the patent is opposed 
In the unusual case where an opposition is limited to only a certain part of 
the patent, the opposition division has to limit its examination to the part 
opposed. In particular, the opposition division cannot decide on the 
revocation of the patent beyond the extent to which it was opposed in the 
notice of opposition. However, if the opposition is directed only to an 
independent claim, the dependent claims are considered to be implicitly 
covered by the extent of the opposition and may be examined by the 
opposition division, provided their validity is prima facie in doubt on the 
basis of the information already available (see G 9/91). Similarly, if only a 
process claim is opposed, a product-by-process claim making reference to 
the same process is considered to be implicitly covered by the extent of 
opposition and may be examined under the same conditions as above 
(see T 525/96). 
2.2 Examination of the grounds for opposition 
Opposition proceedings are not a continuation of examination proceedings. 
Hence as a general rule the opposition division will confine its examination 
to those grounds for opposition brought forward by the opponent. If, for 
example, the opposition is filed only on the grounds that the subject-matter 
of the European patent is not sufficiently disclosed or that it extends beyond 
the content of the patent application as filed, the opposition division will 
examine the patentability of the subject-matter of the European patent 
pursuant to Art. 52 to 57 only if facts have come to its notice which, prima 
facie, wholly or partially prejudice the maintenance of the patent 
(see G 10/91). 
A document indicated in the patent specification as the closest or important 
prior art for the purposes of elucidating the technical problem set out in the 
description forms part of the opposition proceedings even if not expressly 
cited within the opposition period. The same applies to any relevant 
documents cited in the patent specification which do not constitute the 
closest prior art but whose contents are nevertheless important for 
understanding the problem underlying the invention within the meaning of 
Rule 42(1)(c) EPC (T 536/88, in particular point 2.1). 
Art. 101(1) 
Part D – Chapter V-2 

 
 
Once proceedings for examining the opposition(s) have been initiated 
because an admissible opposition has been filed (although it may have 
been withdrawn in the interim), there may be reason to believe that other 
grounds exist which, prima facie, in whole or in part prejudice the 
maintenance of the European patent. If that is the case, these grounds will 
generally be examined by the opposition division of its own motion pursuant 
to Rule 81(1). Such other grounds may result from facts emerging from the 
search report or the examination procedure, the personal knowledge of the 
division's members or observations presented by third parties pursuant to 
Art. 115 (see also E-VI, 3). Such grounds may also have been put forward 
in another opposition which has been rejected as inadmissible, or in 
another opposition deemed not to have been filed. They may also be any 
grounds submitted belatedly (see E-VI, 1.1 and E-VI, 2). Under Art. 114(1), 
such prejudicial grounds put forward in an opposition which has been 
withdrawn will also generally be examined by the opposition division of its 
own motion. In carrying out such examination the opposition division will, 
however, take the interests of procedural expediency into account 
(see E-VI, 1.2). If the decision is to be based on grounds to be taken into 
account pursuant to Art. 114(1) or Rule 81(1), the parties must be given the 
opportunity to comment (see E-X, 1). 
If during examination of the opposition an allegation about a relevant fact 
seems plausible, it may be taken into account without further evidence if it 
is not challenged by the other party. 
If a fact is contested or not plausible, the party making the allegation must 
prove it. If the parties to opposition proceedings make contrary assertions 
which they cannot substantiate and the opposition division is unable to 
establish the facts of its own motion, the patent proprietor is given the 
benefit of the doubt (see T 219/83, Headnote I). 
For example, if the opponent raises an objection under Art. 100(b) and 
provides experimental evidence that e.g. the claimed process cannot be 
realised, and the patent proprietor replies that the process can be carried 
out without undue burden by the skilled person taking common general 
knowledge also into consideration (T 281/86, OJ EPO 1989, 202; 
reasons 6), the patent proprietor has to provide proof of what was common 
general knowledge at the filing date (or the date of the earliest priority if 
priority has been claimed). 
Pursuant to Art. 100, the absence of unity of invention is not a ground for 
opposition (see D-III, 5). 
Since unity of invention under Art. 82 is only required for the European 
patent application, the unity of the subject-matter of the European patent 
may not be examined by the opposition division, even of its own motion. In 
particular, where the facts, evidence and arguments which come to light in 
the opposition proceedings lead to the maintenance of the European patent 
in amended form, there will be no further examination as to whether the 
remaining subject-matter of the patent contains a single invention or more 
than one. Any lack of unity must be accepted (see G 1/91). 
Rule 81(1) 
Art. 114 
Art. 82 
 

Part D – Chapter V-3 
 
Similarly, where amendments occasioned by a ground for opposition 
(see H-II, 3.1) contain multiple independent claims in the same category 
and are still covered by the independent claim as granted, compliance with 
Rule 43(2) will not be examined further. 
The grounds for opposition laid down in Art. 100 are examined in greater 
detail below. 
3. Non-patentability pursuant to Art. 52 to 57 
The same substantive requirements apply in the opposition procedure 
regarding patentability pursuant to Art. 52 to 57 as in the examination 
procedure. G-I to VII will therefore also be applied in opposition 
proceedings. However, it will be more common in opposition proceedings 
than in examination procedure for the examination as to patentability to be 
based on the state of the art as made available to the public not by written 
description but "by means of an oral description, by use, or in any other 
way" (see Art. 54(2) and G-IV, 7). 
4. Insufficient disclosure of the invention 
Determination of whether the disclosure of an invention in a European 
patent application is sufficient is dealt with in F-III, 1 to 3. 
The principles set out there will also apply mutatis mutandis to the 
opposition procedure. The overriding consideration in this context is the 
disclosed content of the European patent specification, that is to say what a 
person skilled in the art is able to derive directly and unambiguously from 
the explicit and implicit disclosure in the patent claims, description and 
drawings, if any, without using inventiveness. Pursuant to Art. 100(b), the 
patent has to disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently clear and 
complete for it to be carried out by persons skilled in the art. If the patent 
specification does not disclose the invention sufficiently clearly to enable it 
to be carried out over the full scope of the claim in accordance with 
Art. 100(b), this may be remedied, provided the original documents 
contained a sufficient disclosure, but subject to the condition that, as 
required under Art. 123(2), the subject-matter of the European patent does 
not extend beyond the content of the application as filed and, as required 
under Art. 123(3), the protection conferred is not extended. 
The skilled person wishing to implement the claimed invention reads the 
claims in a technically sensible manner. An objection of insufficient 
disclosure of the invention is therefore not to be based on embodiments 
that are meaningless and not consistent with the teaching of the application 
as a whole (see T 521/12). 
There is normally no deficiency under Art. 100(b) if a feature which is 
essential for performance of the invention is missing from the claim but is 
disclosed in the description and/or drawings. However, unduly broad claims 
may be objected to under Art. 56 (see T 939/92). 
5. Clarity of claims and support by the description 
Clarity is not a ground for opposition. Opposition proceedings are not 
designed as a procedure for generally amending (or revoking) patents that 
Art. 100(a) 
Art. 100(b) 
Art. 100 
Part D – Chapter V-4 

 
 
contain any kind of defect, and therefore opposition proceedings are not to 
be regarded as a continuation of examination proceedings. As a general 
rule this means that a granted claim has to be lived with even if new facts 
(e.g. new prior art) demonstrate that the claim is unclear (G 3/14). 
In considering whether, for the purpose of Art. 101(3), a patent as amended 
meets the requirements of the EPC, the claims of the patent may be 
examined for compliance with the requirements of Art. 84 only when, and 
then only to the extent that, an amendment introduces non-compliance with 
Art. 84 (G 3/14, confirming the jurisprudence as exemplified by T 301/87). 
A lack of compliance with Art. 84 cannot be seen as having been 
introduced by an amendment if a clarity problem already present in the 
claims as granted is only brought into notice, highlighted or made visible by 
the amendment. 
According to G 3/14, the amendment of one claim or part of a patent cannot 
lead to a re-examination of other parts of the patent which have not been 
amended. Thus, the deletion of an independent claim with its dependent 
claims or the deletion of a dependent claim leaving the independent claims 
and other dependent claims intact does not permit examination of the 
remaining claims for compliance with Art. 84. 
A claim amended during opposition proceedings is not subject to 
examination for compliance with Art. 84 if it results from 
(i) 
inserting a complete dependent claim as granted into an independent 
claim; 
(ii) 
combining one of several alternative embodiments of the dependent 
claim as granted with the independent claim as granted; 
(iii) 
deleting wording from a granted claim (whether independent or 
dependent), whereby its scope is narrowed but a pre-existing lack of 
compliance with Art. 84 is left intact (as exemplified by T 301/87); or 
(iv) 
deleting optional features from a granted claim (whether independent 
or dependent). 
However, an amended claim is to be examined for compliance with Art. 84: 
(v) 
if features are taken from the description and inserted into a granted 
claim by way of amendment; or 
(vi) 
if a feature from a dependent claim as granted is introduced into an 
independent claim as granted and this feature was previously 
connected with other features of that dependent claim and an alleged 
lack of compliance with Art. 84 is introduced by the amendment. 
Correspondingly, the description of the patent may be examined for 
compliance with the requirements of Art. 84 only when, and then only to the 
extent that, an amendment of the patent introduces non-compliance with 
Art. 84. In particular, inconsistencies between the description and the 
Art. 101(3) 
 

Part D – Chapter V-5 
 
claims resulting from amendments during opposition proceedings and 
casting doubt on the subject-matter for which protection is sought must be 
avoided (see F-IV, 4.3 for examination of inconsistencies between the 
description and the claims in general). 
Other amendments of the description not resulting from amendments of the 
claims during opposition proceedings may be allowed under the conditions 
laid down in H-II, 3.2. 
6. Subject-matter of the European patent extending beyond the 
original disclosure 
6.1 Basis of this ground for opposition 
This ground for opposition under Art. 100(c) refers back to Art. 123(2) and 
stipulates that the subject-matter of a European patent may not extend 
beyond the content of the application as filed. In the case of a patent 
granted on the basis of a European divisional application (Art. 76(1)), two 
criteria apply: the subject-matter must not extend beyond the content of the 
earlier application as filed (Art. 76(1)), and it must not extend beyond the 
content of the divisional application as filed (Art. 123(2)) (see T 873/94). 
Similar considerations apply to applications filed under Art. 61. In the case 
of a patent granted on an application filed in a language other than an 
official language of the EPO either in accordance with Art. 14(2) or in 
accordance with Rule 40 (see Rule 40(3)), the original text will, as provided 
for in Art. 70(2), constitute the basis for determining whether the 
subject-matter of the European patent extends beyond the content of the 
application as filed. However, unless, for example, the opponent adduces 
proof to the contrary the opposition division may, under Rule 7, assume 
that the translation referred to in Art. 14(2) or Rule 40(3) is in conformity 
with the original text of the application. 
6.2 Distinction between allowable and unallowable amendments 
The distinction between allowable amendments to the content of a 
European patent application and amendments which are at variance with 
Art. 123(2) or Art. 76(1) is set forth in H-IV, 2, and C-IX, 1.4. These 
guidelines will be applied mutatis mutandis in the course of opposition 
proceedings to determine whether the subject-matter of the European 
patent as granted or as amended during the opposition proceedings 
extends beyond the content of the application as filed. 
Art. 100(c) 
 

Part D – Chapter VI-1 
 
Chapter VI – Procedure for the examination of 
the opposition 
(Oral proceedings: see E-III; taking and conservation of evidence: 
see E-IV). 
1. General remarks 
The opposition division will first of all endeavour to reach a decision in 
written proceedings. Taking account of the investigations usually conducted 
beforehand by the first member (see D-II, 5 and 6), the opposition division 
will base its decision on the written submissions of the parties and, where 
appropriate, on other written evidence obtained, in particular, through the 
production of documents, requests for information and sworn statements in 
writing. 
The parties in inter partes cases are subject to a particular duty to facilitate 
due and swift conduct of the proceedings, in particular by submitting all 
relevant facts, evidence, arguments and requests as early and completely 
as possible (see D-IV, 1.2.2.1 and E-IV, 1.2). Furthermore, any ground, fact 
and evidence filed by the opponent(s) after the expiry of the opposition 
period are considered as late-filed unless they are due to a change in the 
subject of the proceedings; see E-VI, 2 and subsections for more details. 
Admissibility of amendments by the proprietor is treated in detail in H-II, 3 
to H-II, 3.5, E-VI, 2.2.2 and E-VI, 2.2.3. 
If the opposition division considers it expedient, or if any party requests oral 
proceedings, oral proceedings in accordance with Art. 116(1) will be held 
before the opposition division after suitable preparation (see D-VI, 3.2). In 
the oral proceedings, the parties may state their cases and make 
submissions in order to clarify outstanding questions. Members of the 
opposition division may put questions to the parties. 
In special, less common cases it will occasionally prove necessary in 
opposition proceedings for oral evidence to be taken by the opposition 
division as part of oral proceedings or for the conservation of evidence, or 
by the first member outside the oral proceedings. The opposition division is 
not obliged to take oral evidence if it does not consider it necessary, even if 
a party has so requested. Oral evidence may be taken, where appropriate 
under oath, before the competent court in the country of residence of the 
person to be heard. A member of the opposition division may, at the 
request 
of 
the 
opposition 
division, 
attend 
such 
court 
hearings 
(see E-IV, 1.3). 
The principal means of taking oral evidence will be the hearing of witnesses 
and parties (see E-IV, 1.6). 
Only in exceptional cases will evidence be obtained at the initiative of the 
opposition division by means of oral and/or written reports by experts 
(see E-IV, 1.8.1) or by carrying out an inspection (see E-IV, 1.2, last 
paragraph). In view of the specialised knowledge of the members of the 
Art. 114(2) 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
Rule 80 
Art. 116 
Rules 117 to 120 
Part D – Chapter VI-2 

 
 
opposition division – and of the costs involved – such means will be used 
only as a last resort. 
2. 
Adherence to the text of the European patent submitted or 
approved by the patent proprietor 
2.1 Basis for the examination 
If the patent proprietors submit amendments to the description, claims or 
drawings after the notice of opposition has been communicated to them 
(see H-II, 3), the opposition division must take as a basis for its examination 
the text of the European patent submitted by the patent proprietors. This 
principle, that the opposition division must concern itself solely with the text 
most recently "submitted or agreed by the patent proprietor", also applies to 
the rest of the opposition procedure. (As regards the possibility of 
amending texts, see H-IV, 3.1, second paragraph). 
2.2 Revocation of the patent 
Where it is stated that the patent proprietor no longer approves the text in 
which the patent was granted and no amended text is submitted, the patent 
must be revoked. This also applies when the patent proprietor requests that 
the patent be revoked. 
3. 
Invitation to file observations 
3.1 Opposition division's communications 
In examining the opposition, the opposition division will invite the parties, as 
often as is necessary, to clarify the substance of the case, to file 
observations on communications from another party or issued by itself 
(see E-II, 1) and, where appropriate, to adduce evidence in respect of 
matters under dispute. Rule 81(2) does not require the opposition division 
to set a period for replying to this invitation. Such a period will, however, be 
set whenever the opposition division considers this expedient. As regards 
the length of the period see E-VIII, 1.2, as regards the extension of a period 
see E-VIII, 1.6, 
and 
as 
regards 
late 
submission 
of 
observations 
see E-VIII, 1.7 and E-VIII, 1.8, as well as Art. 114(2). 
Communications from the opposition division and all replies thereto must 
be communicated to all parties. 
3.2 Summons to oral proceedings 
If oral proceedings have to be arranged, the parties must be summoned to 
them as quickly as possible at reasonable notice (see E-III, 6). If the first 
action of the opposition division is to summon the parties, the first 
substantive communication of the opposition division under Art. 101(1) is 
annexed to the summons to oral proceedings. For the form of oral 
proceedings, see E-III, 5, E-III, 1.2 and E-III, 1.3. 
Together with the summons, the opposition division will draw attention to 
and in the annexed communication explain the points which in its opinion 
need to be discussed for the purposes of the decision to be taken; where 
this has already been done sufficiently in a prior communication, it is 
appropriate to refer to that communication. Normally, the annexed 
Art. 113(2) 
Art. 101(1) 
Rule 81(2) 
Rule 81(2) 
Art. 116(1) 
Rule 115(1) 
Rule 116(1) 
 

Part D – Chapter VI-3 
 
communication will also contain the provisional and nonbinding opinion of 
the opposition division on the positions adopted by the parties and in 
particular on amendments filed by the patent proprietor. At the same time, a 
date will be fixed up to which written submissions may be made or 
amendments may be filed. Normally this date will be two months before the 
date of the oral proceedings. As this date is not a time limit, Rule 132 does 
not apply and the parties cannot request to postpone it. 
The summons to oral proceedings and the annexed communication do not 
constitute decisions within the meaning of Art. 106(1) and can thus only be 
appealed together with the final decision (see T 1954/14) unless either of 
them allows a separate appeal to be filed (see E-X, 3). 
4. Communications from the opposition division to the patent 
proprietor 
4.1 Communications from the opposition division; reasoned 
statement 
Where necessary, any communication to the patent proprietor must contain 
a reasoned statement. This also applies to any communication to other 
parties which is communicated to the proprietor of the patent for information 
only. A reasoned statement will usually not be required if the 
communication concerns only matters relating to form or if it contains no 
more than self-explanatory proposals. Where appropriate, all the grounds 
against the maintenance of the European patent are to be given in the 
communication. 
4.2 Invitation to file amended documents 
If the opposition division considers that the European patent cannot be 
maintained in an unamended form, it must inform the patent proprietors 
accordingly, stating the grounds, and give them the opportunity to amend, 
in appropriate cases, the description, claims and drawings. As regards the 
time limit here, see E-VIII, 1.2. Where necessary, the description adjusted 
in line with the new claims (see D-IV, 5.3 and D-V, 5) will also deal with the 
state of the art as set out in the opposition proceedings, the technical 
purpose and the advantages of the invention as it will then stand. However, 
if the patent proprietor has neither requested oral proceedings nor filed 
amendments (including any auxiliary requests), the patent can be revoked 
directly on the basis of the grounds, evidence and arguments on file (see 
also E-X, 1.1). 
Proposals for amendment filed at a late stage in the proceedings may be 
disregarded (see T 406/86). 
For amended documents, see H-III, 2. 
5. Additional search 
In exceptional cases, the opposition division, like the examining division, 
may on its own initiative cite new material relating to the state of the art and 
take it into account in its subsequent decision (see C-IV, 7.4). In the normal 
course of events, however, since the grant of the patent will have been 
preceded by a search into the subject-matter of the application by the 
Rule 81(3) 
Rule 81(2) and (3) 
Part D – Chapter VI-4 

 
 
search division, by the examining division and generally by the 
opponent(s), no additional search will be made. Only in exceptional cases 
will an additional search by the opposition division be set in train. Such a 
case might arise, for example, if in the opposition the main subject covered 
by the patent shifts to elements of a dependent claim which were originally 
of subsidiary importance, to elements which were previously not set out in 
the claims, but only in the description, to individual features of a 
combination, or to sub-combinations, and there are grounds for believing 
that the original search did not extend to such elements or features and if 
no relevant document can be found quickly in the circumstances set out in 
C-IV, 7.4. 
6. 
Examination of the opposition during oral proceedings 
For details regarding the examination shortly before and during oral 
proceedings and the conduct thereof, see E-III, 8. 
7. 
Preparation of the decision 
7.1 General remarks 
If the opposition division does not consider it expedient to arrange for oral 
proceedings of its own motion (see E-III, 4 and below) or for the taking of 
evidence even where the latter is requested (see E-IV), and if no 
admissible request for oral proceedings has been received from a party 
(see E-III, 2), the decision must be reached on the basis of written 
proceedings. In this case there is no obligation to arrange for oral 
proceedings before a decision is reached. 
If the case is decided on the basis of written proceedings, submissions filed 
after the decision has been handed over to the EPO internal postal service 
for remittal to the parties can no longer be considered, as from that moment 
the division cannot amend the decision (see G 12/91), except to the limited 
extent provided for in Rule 140 (see H-VI, 3.1). 
The decision, whether or not preceded by oral proceedings or the taking of 
evidence, may be to revoke the patent (see D-VIII, 1.2), to reject the 
opposition (see D-VIII, 1.3) or to maintain the patent as amended 
(see D-VIII, 1.4). 
7.2 Preparation of a decision to maintain a European patent in 
amended form 
7.2.1 Procedural requirements 
A decision to maintain the patent in amended form may be delivered only 
when the patent proprietor has approved the new text on the basis of which 
the opposition division intends to maintain the patent and the opponent has 
had sufficient opportunity to comment on the proposed new text. 
Both prerequisites can be fulfilled during oral proceedings at which the 
opposition division establishes the text including the amended description 
and, if necessary, the amended figures. In written proceedings, the 
necessary opportunity to comment on the new text on the basis of which 
the opposition division intends to maintain the patent is given to the 
Art. 116(1) 
Rule 117 
Art. 113 
 

Part D – Chapter VI-5 
 
opponent when a communication is issued to the parties. Once these 
requirements have been met, a separate communication under Rule 82(1) 
is neither necessary nor appropriate (see G 1/88). 
If the patent can be maintained in the amended form, the opposition 
division tries to obtain the patent proprietor's approval of the text in which 
the patent can be maintained and gives the opponent an opportunity to 
comment on it. An interlocutory decision can then be delivered. 
If these requirements have still not been met and no oral proceedings are 
being held, a communication under Art. 101(1) must be issued. This also 
applies when it has been established in principle that the patent can be 
maintained in a particular form but a complete text expressly approved by 
the patent proprietor is not yet available. 
The patent proprietor's approval of an amended version of the patent need 
not be given in a separate, express declaration; it may also be apparent 
from the circumstances, in particular from the fact that an amended version 
was filed or requested. This applies equally to versions which have been 
filed as an auxiliary request. (For the wording of documents in oral 
proceedings, see E-III, 8.11 and E-III, 8.11.1). 
The patent proprietor's approval can also be obtained through a 
communication under Rule 82(1) in which the opposition division informs 
the parties that it "intends to maintain the patent as amended" and invites 
them to "state their observations within a period of two months if they 
disapprove of the text in which it is intended to maintain the patent". If no 
objections are filed to the text thus notified, the patent proprietor is 
considered to approve of it. 
A communication under Rule 82(1) can also be sent if the opposition 
division considers that the complete document expressly approved by the 
patent proprietor, on which the opponent has been able to comment, still 
requires amendments. However, these must not go beyond such editorial 
changes to the wording as appear absolutely necessary by comparison 
with the text most recently submitted or approved by the patent proprietor. 
The opposition division will draw attention to such amendments and state 
why they are required if they are not self-explanatory. 
If within the period specified in the communication, or in a communication 
under Rule 82(1), the patent proprietor objects to the text in which the 
patent is to be maintained, the proceedings are continued. The European 
patent can be revoked in the subsequent proceedings if the patent 
proprietor objects to the text and fails to submit new, properly amended 
documents despite having been requested to do so. 
If any opponent objects to the text communicated to them in which it is 
intended to maintain the patent, the opposition division will continue 
examining the opposition if it considers that the EPC prejudices the 
maintenance of the patent in the text initially envisaged. 
Rule 82(1) 
Part D – Chapter VI-6 

 
 
7.2.2 Decision on the documents on the basis of which the patent is 
to be maintained 
If the opposition division considers that the patent can be maintained on the 
basis of the text submitted or approved by the patent proprietor, and the 
opponent has had sufficient opportunity to comment on this text – either in 
writing or during oral proceedings – as well as on the reasons decisive to 
the patent's maintenance, the opposition division will issue an interlocutory 
decision to the effect that the patent and the invention to which it relates 
meet the requirements of the EPC following the amendments made by the 
patent proprietor during the opposition proceedings. 
If the patent can only be maintained on the basis of an auxiliary request, 
the decision has to contain a reasoned statement why the version of the 
main request (and any higher-ranking auxiliary request) does not meet the 
requirements of the EPC (see E-X, 2.9, H-III, 3.4.1 and H-III, 3.4.2). 
A separate appeal under Art. 106(2) is allowed against this decision, which 
must be reasoned having regard to the grounds for opposition maintained 
by the opponent or taken up by the opposition division. The decision is 
delivered in all cases where a European patent is maintained in amended 
form, even if the opponent has approved of the text communicated by the 
opposition division or has not commented on it. In the former case, the 
decision is fairly brief, merely noting that in the light of the amended text the 
opponent no longer maintains the original grounds for opposition. If this 
decision is not contested, the ruling enshrined in it becomes final and as a 
result the documents can no longer be amended. 
This interlocutory decision is intended to save the patent proprietor 
unnecessary translation costs arising from an amendment to the text in 
appeal proceedings. It nevertheless qualifies as a grant decision in the 
sense of G 1/10 and corrections can only be requested in the narrow ambit 
provided for in Rule 140 (see H-VI, 3.1). 
7.2.3 Request for publishing fee, translations and a formally 
compliant version of amended text passages 
Once the interlocutory decision becomes final or the amended text in which 
the patent is to be maintained has been drawn up in opposition appeal 
proceedings, the formalities officer requests the patent proprietor 
– 
to pay, within three months, the fee for publishing a new specification 
of the European patent; 
– 
to file translations of any amended claims in the two official 
languages of the EPO other than the language of the proceedings; 
and 
– 
to file a formally compliant verbatim version of amended text 
passages if in oral opposition proceedings the interlocutory decision 
of the opposition division under Art. 101(3)(a) and 106(2) or the 
board of appeal decision under Art. 111(2) has been based on 
documents not complying with Rule 50(1) (see E-III, 8.7). 
Rule 82(2) 
 

Part D – Chapter VI-7 
 
If the European patent in the amended form contains different claims for 
different contracting states, a translation of all sets of claims – in the text 
communicated to the patent proprietor – into all official languages other 
than the language of the proceedings must be filed. 
If the request under the first paragraph above is not complied with "in due 
time", the acts may still be validly performed within two months of 
notification of a communication pointing out the failure to observe the time 
limit, provided that within this two-month period the prescribed surcharge is 
paid. If any of the acts is not performed within the period of grace, the 
formalities officer will issue a decision for revocation of the patent in 
accordance with Rule 82(3). 
8. Request to stay opposition proceedings 
If a party requests a stay of opposition proceedings for the sole reason of 
pending appeal or opposition proceedings of a patent family member (e.g. 
a parent application), the request will not be granted. The party will receive 
a communication from the opposition division indicating the reasons for its 
intention not to grant the request. This communication does not constitute 
an appealable decision under Art. 106(1) or Art. 106(2). 
If oral proceedings take place and the request is maintained, the opposition 
division will address it at oral proceedings, giving the parties an opportunity 
to comment. After the oral discussion on the stay, the opposition division 
will take a decision on the request. 
Reasons for a stay or interruption of proceedings are set out in E-VII, 1 to 
3. 
Rule 82(2) and  
(3) 
Art. 2(1), item 9, 
RFees 
 

Part D – Chapter VII-1 
 
Chapter VII – Details and special features of the 
proceedings 
1. Sequence of proceedings 
1.1 Basic principle 
Examination of the admissibility of the opposition and preparation of the 
examination of the opposition will be commenced immediately after the 
notice of opposition has been received by the formalities officer or the 
opposition division (see D-IV, 1 and 3 and D-V, 1 and 2). 
If during the rest of the proceedings the opposition division, on account of 
the amount of work in hand, is unable to process immediately all the 
oppositions submitted, the reference date for the sequence of tasks will, in 
principle, be the date on which the last observations in respect of which a 
time limit had been laid down were submitted by any of the parties, but may 
not be later than the date on which the time limit expired. Documents 
received unsolicited or not subject to a previously stipulated official time 
limit, in connection with official communications setting a time limit, will not 
affect the sequence of tasks unless they require a further early notification 
setting a time limit. 
1.2 Exceptions 
Notwithstanding D-VII, 1.1 above, oppositions are to be given priority: 
(i) 
if the earlier examination proceedings were of considerably longer 
duration than usual; 
(ii) 
if the opposition proceedings have already extended over a 
considerably longer period than usual; 
(iii) 
if a party to the proceedings has submitted a reasoned request for 
accelerated processing in a case where an infringement action in 
respect of the European patent is pending before the Unified Patent 
Court or a national court of a contracting state, or if the EPO is 
informed by the Unified Patent Court, a national court or competent 
authority of a contracting state that infringement actions are pending 
(see the notice from the EPO dated 24 April 2023, Supplementary 
publication 3, OJ EPO 2023, 9; see E-VIII, 5); 
(iv) 
if other matters to be dealt with, e.g. divisional applications, hinge 
upon the final decision concerning the opposition; or 
(v) 
if the next procedural step can be dealt with relatively quickly. 
2. Request for documents 
Documents referred to by a party to opposition proceedings must be filed 
together with the notice of opposition or the written submissions. A single 
copy of these documents is sufficient. If such documents are neither 
enclosed nor filed in due time upon invitation by the formalities officer, the 
Rule 83 
Part D – Chapter VII-2 

 
 
opposition division may decide not to take any arguments based on them 
into account. 
In implementing this provision, the desired aim of speeding up the 
procedure will be borne in mind as much as the common interest in taking 
obviously relevant submissions into account. 
If during the opposition proceedings it becomes apparent that the previous 
application from which the opposed patent claims priority is not in an official 
language of the European Patent Office and the validity of the priority claim 
is relevant to the determination of the patentability of the subject-matter of 
the patent concerned, the opposition division will invite the patent proprietor 
to file a translation of that application into one of the official languages 
within a period to be specified. Alternatively, a declaration may be 
submitted that the European patent application on the basis of which the 
opposed patent was granted is a complete translation of the previous 
application. For the procedure for inviting the patent proprietor to file such a 
translation or declaration see A-III, 6.8, and F-VI, 3.4. Such an invitation is 
not to be issued if the translation of the previous application or the 
declaration was available to the European Patent Office and is to be 
included in the file of the European patent application under Rule 53(2). 
Failure by the patent proprietor to supply a required translation or 
declaration in due time will lead to the priority right being lost. This will have 
the effect that the intermediate document(s) will become prior art under 
Art. 54(2) or Art. 54(3), as applicable, and therefore relevant for the 
assessment of patentability (see A-III, 6.8.3). The patent proprietor will be 
notified of this loss of rights (see A-III, 6.11). As a means of redress, the 
patent proprietor may request either re-establishment of rights under 
Art. 122 and Rule 136 (see E-VIII, 3) or a decision under Rule 112(2) 
(see E-VIII, 1.9.3). 
3. 
Unity of the European patent 
3.1 Basic principle 
If the patent proprietors are not the same for different designated 
contracting states, the unity of the European patent in opposition 
proceedings will not be affected, since such persons are to be regarded as 
joint proprietors (see D-I, 6, second and third paragraphs). 
In particular, the text of the European patent will be uniform for all 
designated contracting states unless otherwise provided for in the EPC 
(see D-VII, 3.2 and H-III, 4). 
3.2 Factors affecting the unity of the European patent 
The unity of the European patent in opposition proceedings will be affected 
if the previous patent proprietor and the person replacing them pursuant to 
Art. 99(4) in respect of a particular contracting state are not deemed to be 
joint patent proprietors (see D-I, 6). In this event, the opposition 
proceedings involving the different patent proprietors must be conducted 
separately. Since different requests may be submitted by the two patent 
proprietors (e.g. as regards amendments to the claims), the two sets of 
Rule 53(3) 
Art. 118 
 

Part D – Chapter VII-3 
 
opposition proceedings may lead to different conclusions, e.g. as regards 
the text of the European patent or the scope of protection. 
4. Procedure where the patent proprietor is not entitled 
4.1 Stay of proceedings 
If third parties provide proof, e.g. a certificate from the court concerned, to 
the EPO during opposition proceedings or during the opposition period that 
they have opened proceedings against the patent proprietor for the purpose 
of obtaining a decision within the meaning of Art. 61(1), opposition 
proceedings are stayed by the Legal Division in accordance with Rule 14(1) 
EPC unless the third parties consent to their continuation. Such consent 
must be communicated in writing to the EPO and is irrevocable. However, 
the proceedings will be stayed only if the opposition division has deemed 
the opposition admissible. 
If proceedings within the meaning of Art. 61(1) are instituted during the 
opposition period, a stay of proceedings will be possible only if a notice of 
opposition has been filed. Accordingly, the third party might have to file an 
opposition itself in order to benefit from a stay of proceedings under 
Rule 78. 
The dates of stay and resumption of proceedings will be entered in the 
European Patent Register. The parties to the opposition proceedings are to 
be informed of the order staying the proceedings. 
4.1.1 Date of the stay of proceedings 
The proceedings are stayed on the date on which the EPO receives 
evidence that proceedings against the patent proprietor have been 
instituted. The requirements for valid institution of relevant proceedings are 
determined by national law (J 7/00). 
4.1.2 Legal character and effect of the stay of proceedings 
Stay of proceedings is a preliminary procedural measure sui generis which 
takes immediate effect as a preventive measure to preserve the third 
party's possible rights (J 28/94; J 15/06). 
The patent proprietor will not be heard but may file a request for an 
appealable decision on the stay of proceedings. 
Stay of proceedings means that the legal status quo existing at the time of 
ordering is maintained, i.e. neither the EPO nor the parties may validly 
perform any legal acts (J 38/92). 
An automatic debit order ceases to be effective on the day on which a stay 
of the proceedings takes effect (see Point 11.1(c) AAD, Annex A.1 to the 
ADA, 
Supplementary publication 3, 
OJ EPO 2022, 
page 35). 
If 
the 
automatic debiting procedure is to be used again after resumption of the 
proceedings, a new automatic debit order is to be filed. 
Rule 78(1) 
Part D – Chapter VII-4 

 
 
4.2 Continuation of proceedings 
The date of the continuation of the proceedings and the legal basis for their 
continuation are to be communicated to the parties to the opposition 
proceedings. 
4.2.1 Continuation after a final decision 
Proceedings are resumed when evidence is provided that a final decision 
within the meaning of Art. 61(1) has been taken. If the decision is in favour 
of the third party, the proceedings may not be resumed earlier than three 
months after the decision has become final, unless the third-party requests 
resumption. 
4.2.2 Continuation regardless of the stage reached in national 
proceedings 
When giving a decision on the stay of proceedings or thereafter, the Legal 
Division may set a date on which it intends to continue the proceedings, 
regardless of the stage reached in the national proceedings. 
Unlike the decision on staying the proceedings, it is at the discretion of the 
Legal Division to decide whether proceedings are to be resumed. In 
exercising this discretion, the Legal Division has to take into account the 
impact of a further suspension or the continuation of the proceedings on 
each of the parties (J 33/03). Some aspects to be taken into account when 
exercising this discretion are the duration of the stay and the outcome of 
first instance proceedings before national courts. Likewise, it will be 
considered whether delaying tactics are being employed by the third party. 
4.3 Interruption of time limits 
The time limits in force at the date of stay are interrupted by the stay of 
proceedings. The time which has not yet elapsed begins to run as from the 
date on which proceedings are resumed; however, the time still to run after 
the resumption of the proceedings must not be less than two months. 
Example: 
A communication under Rule 82(2) maintaining the patent in amended form 
is despatched by the EPO on 7 November 2023. Under Rule 126(2) and 
Rule 131(2), this communication is deemed delivered on the date it bears, 
i.e. on 7 November 2023 (OJ EPO 2023, A29). The three-month period to 
pay the publication fee and file the translation of any amended claim starts 
on the day following delivery of the communication, i.e. on 8 November 
2023, and it ends on 7 February 2024. 
If proceedings are stayed under Rule 78(1) by the Legal Division on 
30 November 2023, the three-month period has elapsed from 8 November 
2023 to 29 November 2023 before the event of the staying of the 
proceedings, i.e. 22 days have already passed and the period remaining is 
eight days and two months. Since the remaining period is longer than 
two months, under Rule 78(1) and Rule 14(4) it will run after the resumption 
of the proceedings. 
Rule 14(2) 
Rule 78(1) 
Rule 14(3) 
Rule 78(1) 
Rule 14(4)  
Rule 78(1) 
 

Part D – Chapter VII-5 
 
Hence, if the proceedings are resumed by the Legal Division on 
23 February 2024, the period for paying the publication fee and filing the 
translation of the claims runs until 2 May 2024 for the following reasons: 
(i) 
the day of resumption of the proceedings by the Legal Division 
(23 February 2024) is the first day on which the remaining period 
starts running again (Rule 131(2) does not apply). 
(ii) 
The remaining days are added first and then the remaining months: 
in the example, eight days from and including 23 February 2024 
results in 1 , and the addition of another two months 
results in the remaining period expiring on 1 May 2024. 
(iii) 
Since Rule 134(1) applies also to the remaining period and since the 
1 May 2024 no mail is delivered in Munich and Berlin (public holiday), 
the time limit is extended until 2 May 2024. 
4.4 Department responsible 
The Legal Division is responsible for the procedure where the patent 
proprietor is not entitled (see the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
5. Continuation of the opposition proceedings in the cases covered 
by Rule 84 
5.1 Continuation in the case of surrender or lapse of the patent 
If the European patent has been surrendered or has lapsed for all the 
designated states, the opposition proceedings must be continued at the 
request of the opponent filed within two months after the date on which the 
opposition division informed the opponent of the surrender or lapse. 
Evidence of the lapse must generally be provided by submitting extracts 
from the Patent Registers of the designated contracting states. 
Surrender or lapse has immediate nonretroactive effect (i.e. patent 
protection ceases on the date of surrender or lapse), whereas a revoked 
patent is deemed to have had no effect from the outset (Art. 68). So the 
opponent may still have an interest in the revocation of a lapsed or 
surrendered patent. 
If, in the case of a request for continuation of the proceedings, the patent 
proprietor has renounced before the competent authorities in the 
designated states all rights conferred by the patent with ab initio and 
universal effect, or if no request for continuation has been received within 
the time limit, the opposition proceedings will be closed. The decision to 
close the proceedings will be communicated to the parties. 
A statement by the patent proprietors making it unambiguously clear that 
they no longer wish their patent to be maintained is considered to be a 
request for its revocation, irrespective of the wording used (T 237/86). For 
details of the procedure to be followed, see D-VIII, 1.2.5. 
Art. 20 
Rule 84(1) 
Part D – Chapter VII-6 

 
 
5.2 Continuation on the death or legal incapacity of the opponent 
In the event of the death or legal incapacity of an opponent, the opposition 
proceedings may be continued by the opposition division of its own motion, 
even without the participation of the heirs or legal representatives, for 
example if the legal proceedings in connection with the will or the 
appointment of a new legal representative would inordinately prolong the 
opposition proceedings. This provision will apply not only where only one 
opposition has been filed: it will also apply in cases where not all those who 
have filed opposition are deceased or legally incapacitated. 
The opposition division will continue the proceedings if, for instance, the 
patent proprietor has submitted amendments to the patent in response to 
the notice of opposition (see T 560/90). The opposition division will also 
continue the proceedings if it considers that the stage reached in the 
opposition proceedings is such that they are likely to result in a limitation or 
revocation of the European patent without further assistance from the 
opponent(s) concerned and without the opposition division itself having to 
undertake extensive investigations (see T 197/88). 
The patent proprietor and any other parties are to be informed that the 
proceedings will be continued. Otherwise the proceedings are closed and 
the decision to close the proceedings is communicated to the parties. 
5.3 Continuation after the opposition has been withdrawn 
The opposition proceedings can be continued even if every opposition has 
been withdrawn. The principles set forth in D-VII, 5.2 apply mutatis 
mutandis in deciding whether the proceedings are to be continued or 
closed. 
6. 
Intervention of the assumed infringer 
Assumed infringers of a patent (see D-I, 5) may file notice of intervention in 
the opposition proceedings within three months of the date on which 
infringement proceedings were instituted against them or on which they 
instituted proceedings for a court ruling that they are not infringing the 
patent. Notice of intervention must be filed in a written reasoned statement. 
It is not deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been paid in 
the amount prescribed in the Rules relating to Fees under the EPC. 
Intervention is permissible as long as opposition or appeal proceedings are 
pending. A third party can become a party to the proceedings during the 
period for filing an appeal only if a party to the proceedings in which the 
decision was given files an appeal pursuant to Art. 107; otherwise the 
decision of the opposition division will become final on expiry of the appeal 
period (see G 4/91 and G 1/94). 
A properly filed and admissible intervention is treated as an opposition, 
which may be based on any ground for opposition under Art. 100 
(see G 1/94). This means that, when intervening at any stage of 
first-instance proceedings, the intervener enjoys essentially the same rights 
as any other party to the proceedings. If the intervener introduces new facts 
and evidence which appear to be crucial, the proceedings may need to be 
prolonged to enable them to be adequately considered. In all other cases 
Rule 84(2) 
Rule 84(2) 
Art. 105 
Rule 89 
 

Part D – Chapter VII-7 
 
the opposition division must ensure that the intervention does not delay the 
proceedings. 
If the notice of intervention is filed at a late stage of the proceedings, for 
example when oral proceedings have already been scheduled, the 
opposition division may dispense with issuing communications under 
Rule 79(1) to Rule 79(3). The introduction of a new ground for opposition at 
such a late stage may lead to a postponement of the date set for oral 
proceedings. 
For accelerated processing of oppositions and accelerated processing 
before the boards of appeal on request, see E-VIII, 5 and E-VIII, 6. 
The notice of intervention, filed in a written reasoned statement, must 
contain: 
(i) 
a statement of the grounds for intervention and corresponding 
evidence. The proceedings providing the grounds for intervention 
must be directed towards establishing an infringement (or its 
absence) as a final legal result. Proceedings directed at the 
preservation of evidence to enable a party to initiate separate 
infringement 
proceedings 
are 
not 
sufficient 
in 
this 
regard 
(see T 439/17). 
(ii) 
the name, address and nationality of the assumed infringer and the 
state in which the assumed infringer's residence or principal place of 
business is located. Names of natural persons must be indicated by 
the person's family name and given name(s), the family name being 
indicated before the given name(s). Names of legal entities, as well 
as companies considered to be legal entities by reason of the 
legislation to which they are subject, must be indicated by their 
official designations. Addresses must be indicated in such a way as 
to satisfy the customary requirements for prompt postal delivery at 
the indicated address. They must comprise all the relevant 
administrative units, including the house number, if any. Assumed 
infringers (whether natural or legal persons) whose residence or 
principal place of business is in an EPC contracting state and who 
act without a professional representative can use an address for 
correspondence other than their residence. The address for 
correspondence must be the assumed infringer's own address. Post 
cannot be sent to a different (natural or legal) person, since that 
requires a valid form of representation under Art. 133 and 134. It is 
recommended 
that 
the 
telephone 
number 
be 
indicated 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.2(i) and 1.4.2); 
(iii) 
the number of the European patent at issue in the opposition 
proceedings in which intervention is made, the name of the patent 
proprietor and the title of the invention (see D-IV, 1.2.2.2(ii) 
and 1.4.2); 
(iv) 
a statement of the extent to which the European patent at issue is 
opposed by way of intervention and of the grounds on which the 
Rule 79(4) 
Rule 89(2) 
Art. 105(1) 
Rule 76(2)(a) 
Rule 41(2)(c) 
Rule 76(2)(b) 
Rule 76(1) 
Rule 76(2)(c) 
Part D – Chapter VII-8 

 
 
opposition by way of intervention is based, as well as an indication of 
the facts and evidence presented in support of these grounds, 
together 
with 
a 
statement 
of 
reasons, 
i.e. arguments 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.1(iii) to 1.2.2.1(v) and 1.4.2); 
(v) 
if the assumed infringer has appointed a representative, the 
representative's name and address of place of business in 
accordance 
with 
subparagraph 
(ii) 
as 
set 
out 
above 
(see D-IV, 1.2.2.2(iii) and 1.4.2). 
D-IV, 1 sets out further details and explains how to deal with the 
intervention if one of these requirements is not fulfilled. 
7. 
Publication of a new specification of the patent 
If a European patent is maintained in an amended form, the EPO must, as 
soon as possible after it publishes the mention of the opposition decision, 
publish a new specification of the European patent containing the 
description, the claims and any drawings, in the amended form. 
Rule 74 applies mutatis mutandis to the new specification of the European 
patent. 
8. 
Transitional provisions for Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 and Art. 54(5) 
Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 and Rule 23a EPC 1973 continue to apply to patents 
granted in respect of patent applications filed before 13 December 2007. 
Consequently, in such cases, the designated countries need to be taken 
into consideration when assessing the novelty of documents according to 
Art. 54(3) (see H-III, 4.2). 
Art. 54(5) applies only to patents for which the date of the decision to grant 
the patent under consideration was taken on or after 13 December 2007 
(Special edition No. 1, OJ EPO 2007, 197). If the decision to grant was 
taken before that date (the date of entry into force of EPC 2000), only 
"Swiss type" claims are allowed for any second or further medical use 
(provided these claims meet with all the other requirements of the 
Convention). 
Where the subject-matter of a claim is rendered novel only by a new 
therapeutic use of a medicament, that claim may no longer take the form of 
Swiss-type claim for European or international patent applications having a 
filing date or earliest priority date of 29 January 2011 or later (see G 2/08, 
OJ EPO 2010, 514 and G-VI, 6.1). 
Examples: 
Date of entry into force of EPC 2000: 13.12.2007. 
The decision to grant for patent EP1 mentions the date of 13.12.2007 in the 
top box and the date of 07.12.2007 in the bottom line. 
EP1 has three claims. 
Rule 76(2)(d) 
Rule 77(1) 
Art. 103 
Rule 87 
 

Part D – Chapter VII-9 
 
Claim 1: Product X. 
Claim 2: Product X for use in medicine. 
Claim 3: Product X for use in the treatment of asthma. 
Notice of opposition is duly filed in 2008 citing prior-art document D1 under 
Art. 54(2) EPC which reveals product X and its therapeutic use in the 
treatment of pain and more specifically headache. 
The situation is as follows: 
According to G 12/91 and J 7/96, published in OJ EPO 1999, 443, the date 
when the decision to grant the patent was taken is the date the decision to 
grant was handed over to the EPO postal service, that is 07.12.2007. 
This means that, as regards medical use-related claims, EP1 is treated 
under the system applicable before EPC 2000's entry into force on 
13.12.2007. Thus, Art. 54(5) EPC does not apply to EP1. 
Therefore, in the opposition proceedings for EP1, claims 1-3 are no longer 
acceptable. Claims 1 and 2 are not novel and claim 3 is not in the required 
"Swiss-type" format for a second medical use (G 5/83). The proprietor of 
patent EP1 would then need to abandon claims 1 and 2 and reformulate 
claim 3 as: "Use of product X for the manufacture of a medicament for the 
treatment of asthma". 
It is to be noted that if the date of handing the decision to grant over to the 
EPO postal service had been 13.12.2007 or later, then Art. 54(5) EPC 
would have been applicable and in the current example claim 3 of EP1 
could have been maintained as granted. 
Example of conflicting prior art: 
The mention of grant for a patent EP1 filed on 10.12.2007, designating FR, 
DE, GB, IT and ES and claiming no priority, is published in the Bulletin in 
May 2012 and nine months later notice of opposition is filed. One of the 
novelty objections is raised under Art. 54(3) EPC with regard to a European 
patent application EP2 published on 18.12.2007, having a valid priority date 
of 16.06.2006 and validly designating FR, DE and GB. Oral proceedings in 
this case are held during 2013. 
The situation is as follows: 
EP1 was granted in respect of a patent application filed before the date of 
EPC 2000's entry into force (i.e. 10.12.2007). Consequently, as regards 
Art. 54(3) EPC, the provisions in force before that date apply. So in this 
case, Art. 54(4) and Rule 23a EPC 1973 still apply (in 2013). Therefore, 
EP2 is relevant for novelty only for the designations FR, DE and GB but not 
for the designations IT and ES. 
Part D – Chapter VII-10 

 
 
Note that if EP1 had in this case been filed on 13.12.2007, Art. 54(4) and 
Rule 23a EPC 1973 would no longer be applicable when assessing novelty 
under Art. 54(3) EPC. Consequently, EP2 would be prior art against the 
novelty of EP1 as a whole, regardless of any common designations. 
 

Part D – Chapter VIII-1 
 
Chapter VIII – Decisions of the opposition 
division 
General remarks on decisions appear in E-X. 
1. Final decisions on an admissible opposition 
1.1 General remarks 
The opposition division has to take a final decision on the opposition, by 
revoking the European patent or rejecting the opposition or ruling that the 
European patent is to be maintained as amended. If the only admissible 
opposition or all the admissible oppositions are withdrawn and the 
opposition division takes the view that as the case stands there is no 
reason for the Office to continue the proceedings of its own motion, the 
proceedings are closed by means of a formal decision (Rule 84(2), second 
sentence). 
1.2 Revocation of the European patent 
1.2.1 Revocation on substantive grounds 
If the opposition division is of the opinion that at least one ground for 
opposition as set out in Art. 100 prejudices the maintenance of the 
European patent, it will revoke the patent under Art. 101(2), first sentence. 
Analogously, if the opposition division is of the opinion that the patent as 
amended during the course of the opposition proceedings does not meet 
the requirements of the Convention, it will revoke the patent under 
Art. 101(3)(b). 
For revocation because the patent proprietor has not agreed to the text, 
see D-VI, 2.2 and D-VIII, 1.2.5. 
1.2.2 Revocation for failure to pay the prescribed fee for publishing, 
to file a translation or to file a formally compliant version of amended 
text passages 
Under Rule 82(2) in conjunction with (3), if the patent proprietor fails in due 
time to: 
(i) 
pay the prescribed fee for the printing of a new specification of the 
European patent, 
(ii) 
file a translation of the amended claims in the two official languages 
of the EPO other than the language of the proceedings 
(see D-VI, 7.2.3), or 
(iii) 
file a formally compliant verbatim version of the amended text 
passages (see E-III, 8.7.3), 
the European patent will be revoked. 
Art. 101(2) 
Art. 101(3)(b) 
Rule 82(3) 
Part D – Chapter VIII-2 

 
 
1.2.3 Revocation for failure to notify the appointment of a new 
representative 
If opposition proceedings are interrupted according to Rule 142(1)(c) and 
the patent proprietor, who is not resident in one of the contracting states, 
does not forward a notification of the appointment of a new representative 
within the two-month period laid down in Rule 142(3)(a) (see E-VII, 1.4(i)), 
the European patent will be revoked. 
1.2.4 Revocation in the event of requirements not being met until 
after expiry of time limits 
In the cases referred to in D-VIII, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3, the European patent will 
be revoked even if the omitted acts have been completed during the period 
between expiry of the time limit and the taking of a final decision, unless a 
request for re-establishment of rights has been filed, in which case a 
decision must first be given on the request. 
1.2.5 Revocation of the patent in the event that the patent proprietor 
no longer wishes the patent to be maintained as granted 
If patent proprietors state that they no longer approve the text in which the 
patent was granted and do not submit an amended text, the patent must be 
revoked pursuant to Art. 101 (see T 203/14 and T 2405/12). This also 
applies when the patent proprietor requests the patent to be revoked. 
If patent proprietors unambiguously declare to the EPO the surrender (or 
abandonment or renunciation) of the patent, this is interpreted as 
equivalent to a request that the patent be revoked (see T 237/86). If the 
request of the patent proprietors is not unambiguous, they are given the 
opportunity to request that the patent be revoked or to declare that they no 
longer approve of the patent being maintained as granted. This results in 
the patent being revoked. 
1.3 Rejection of the opposition 
If the opposition division is of the opinion that the grounds for opposition 
mentioned in Art. 100 do not prejudice the maintenance of the European 
patent unamended, it will reject the opposition. 
1.4 Maintenance of the European patent as amended 
1.4.1 Taking of a final decision 
If the opposition division is of the opinion that, taking into consideration the 
amendments made by the patent proprietor during the opposition 
proceedings, the patent and the invention to which it relates meet the 
requirements of the EPC, it will issue an interlocutory decision to maintain 
the European patent as amended. 
The procedure specified in D-VI, 7.2.1 to 7.2.3 will precede the final 
decision. 
1.4.2 Statement in the decision of the amended form of the European 
patent 
The decision must state which text of the European patent forms the basis 
for maintaining it. 
Rule 142(3)(a) 
Art. 101(2) 
Art. 101(3)(a) 
Rule 82(1) and (2) 
Rule 82(4) 
 

Part D – Chapter VIII-3 
 
2. Other decisions 
2.1 Decision on the inadmissibility of an opposition or intervention 
See D-IV, 3 and 5.5 with reference to the notice of opposition and D-IV, 5.6 
and D-VII, 6 for the intervention of an assumed infringer. 
2.2 Decisions which do not terminate proceedings 
Such decisions are dealt with in E-X, 3. 
See D-VI, 7.2.2 with reference to the maintenance of a patent with 
amended documents. 
2.3 Decision on a notified loss of rights at the request of the person 
concerned 
This decision is dealt with in E-VIII, 1.9.3. 
2.4 Decision on re-establishment of rights 
This decision is dealt with in E-VIII, 3.3. 
2.5 Decision on closure of the opposition proceedings 
This decision is dealt with in D-VII, 5 and D-VIII, 1.1. 
Rule 112(2) 
 

Part D – Chapter IX-1 
 
Chapter IX – Costs 
1. Charging of costs 
1.1 General principle 
Each party to the proceedings must bear the costs it has incurred. 
However, an opposition division may, for reasons of equity, order a different 
apportionment of such costs, which may have been incurred during the 
taking of evidence, in oral proceedings or under other circumstances. 
The phrase "taking of evidence" refers generally to the receiving of 
evidence by an opposition division, whatever the form of such evidence. It 
includes among other things the production of documents and sworn 
statements in writing as well as hearing witnesses (see T 117/86). 
1.2 Decisions on the apportionment of costs 
Apportionment of costs must be dealt with in the decision on the opposition. 
This apportionment will form part of the main decision and will be 
incorporated in the operative part of the decision. 
The decision will deal only with the obligation on the party or parties 
concerned to bear costs. The actual amounts to be paid by one party to 
another must be dealt with in the decision on the fixing of costs 
(see D-IX, 2). 
A statement that the parties will bear their own costs may be incorporated 
in the grounds for the decision on the opposition and must be included in 
cases where one of the parties to the proceedings has submitted a request 
for a decision on the apportionment of costs which the opposition division 
does not consider justified. 
A decision to apportion costs may be made by the opposition division of its 
own motion, even if no application for the apportionment of costs has been 
made. 
In the absence of an express decision on the apportionment of costs, each 
of the parties concerned must bear its own costs. 
1.3 Costs to be taken into consideration 
Apportionment of costs may relate only to those expenses necessary to 
assure proper protection of the rights involved. 
Examples of such expenses are: 
(i) 
expenditure incurred in respect of witnesses and experts, together 
with other costs arising in connection with the taking of evidence; 
(ii) 
remuneration of the representatives of the parties in respect of oral 
proceedings or the taking of evidence; 
Art. 104(1) 
Rule 88 
Rule 88(1) 
Rule 88(1) 
Art. 104(1) 
Part D – Chapter IX-2 

 
 
(iii) 
remuneration of the representatives of the parties in respect of undue 
delaying of the procedure by one of the parties or in respect of the 
late filing of documents; and 
(iv) 
expenditure incurred directly by the parties, i.e. their travel expenses 
in coming to oral proceedings or the taking of evidence. 
Costs incurred in respect of superfluous or irrelevant evidence, etc., cannot 
be apportioned. 
In the order of apportionment as part of its decision, the opposition division 
will state the kind of costs to be differently apportioned and reimbursed to 
the receiving party as clearly and precisely as possible. 
1.4 Principle of equity 
Reasons of equity will require an opposition division to decide on issuing an 
order to apportion costs when the costs arise in whole or in part as a result 
of conduct of one party which is not in keeping with the care required to 
assure proper protection of the rights involved, in other words when the 
costs are culpably incurred as a result of irresponsible or even malicious 
actions. Parties may of course defend their rights or interests (e.g. the 
proprietors defend their patent) by any legally admissible means within the 
framework of the opposition proceedings; they may, for example, request 
oral proceedings or the taking of evidence. 
Accordingly, costs incurred as a result of default or of inappropriate legal 
means used by either party may be charged to the party responsible, even 
if that party has been successful in the opposition proceedings. Situations 
resulting from "force majeure" (such as absence at oral proceedings due to 
a sudden serious illness) do in general not lead to the apportionment of 
costs. 
The following are examples where the principle of equity may be applied: 
The costs incurred by the opponent in preparing oral proceedings which 
have been appointed may be charged to patent proprietors if the latter 
surrender the patent just before the date appointed for the oral 
proceedings, although it was clear when the proceedings were being 
arranged, from a document put forward by the opponent, that the patent 
proprietors had no case and that they alone were therefore liable for their 
irresponsible conduct. 
If an aspect of the state of the art is adduced as an argument at a late 
stage and it can be shown, or it is evident, that the party concerned knew of 
it earlier, e.g. in that the party in question had made prior use of it, the 
additional costs of further oral proceedings unnecessarily incurred by the 
other parties may be charged to the party which caused them by submitting 
this argument at such a late stage. 
If relevant facts or evidence are submitted by a party only at a late stage of 
the proceedings without any good reason and if, as a consequence, 
 

Part D – Chapter IX-3 
 
unnecessary costs are incurred by another party, the opposition division 
may decide on the apportionment of costs. 
2. Procedure for the fixing of costs 
2.1 Fixing of costs by the opposition division 
The formalities officer is entrusted with fixing the amount of the costs to be 
paid to the beneficiary at the request of at least one party. The request from 
a party to the proceedings to fix the costs is admissible only if the decision 
in which the apportionment of costs was ordered has become final. 
A list of costs, with supporting evidence in respect of each amount involved, 
must be attached to the request. Costs may be fixed once their credibility is 
established. 
The parties will be notified of the costs as fixed by the formalities officer 
acting for the opposition division. 
For an explanation of the duties entrusted to the formalities officers, 
see D-II, 7. 
2.2 Appeal against the fixing of costs by the opposition division 
The communication in which the formalities officer has fixed the costs may 
be reviewed if requested by one of the parties to the proceedings. The 
opposition division will then issue an appealable decision. 
The request for such a decision, stating the reasons on which it is based, 
must be filed with the EPO in writing within one month after the date of 
notification of the communication in which the costs have been fixed. This 
request is not deemed to be filed until the fee for the request of a decision 
to be issued by the opposition division on the costs as fixed has been paid 
at the rate prescribed in the Rules relating to Fees under the EPC. 
The opposition division will take a decision on the request without oral 
proceedings. 
This final decision by the opposition division can be appealed by each party 
adversely affected. The appeal will only be admissible if the amount fixed 
exceeds the appeal fee. 
3. Enforcement of the fixing of costs 
Any final decision of the EPO fixing the amount of costs must be dealt with, 
for the purpose of enforcement in the contracting states, in the same way 
as a final decision given by a civil court of the state in the territory of which 
enforcement is to be carried out. Verification of any such decision must be 
limited to its authenticity. 
"Decision" as referred to above also covers the final fixing of costs by the 
opposition division. 
Art. 104(2) 
Rule 88(2) 
Rule 88(2) 
Art. 119 
Rule 88(3) 
Rule 88(4) 
Rule 97(2) 
Art. 104(3) 
 

Part D – Chapter X-1 
 
Chapter X – Limitation and revocation 
procedure 
1. Introduction 
The limitation and revocation procedures are centralised ex parte 
procedures at the level of the EPO which allow the patent proprietor either 
to have the claims of the granted patent limited or to have the whole patent 
revoked for all the designated states. More particularly, the limitation 
procedure offers an opportunity to obtain a limitation of a European patent 
in a short and straightforward procedure. 
Unlike in the opposition procedure, there is no restriction on the period 
between the grant of the patent and the filing of the request. Accordingly, 
the request can be filed at any time after grant, after opposition 
proceedings, or even after expiry of the patent. 
The examining division is competent to decide on requests for limitation 
and revocation. However, certain aspects of this procedure are entrusted to 
formalities officers (see decisions of the President of the EPO dated 
12 December 2013, 
OJ EPO 2014, A6, 
and 
23 November 2015, 
OJ EPO 2015, A104). 
2. Examination for deficiencies in the request 
2.1 Deficiencies which lead to the request being deemed not to have 
been filed 
On receipt of a request for revocation or limitation of a patent, the 
formalities officer will examine whether: 
(i) 
the request is filed with the EPO (Art. 105a(1)) 
(ii) 
opposition proceedings in respect of the patent are not pending at 
the time of filing the request (Art. 105a(2) and Rule 93(1)) 
(iii) 
the relevant fee is paid (Art. 105a(1) and Art. 2(1), item 10a, RFees) 
(iv) 
where the request is filed in a language according to Art. 14(4), the 
translation has been filed in due time (Rule 6(2)) 
(v) 
where the requester is required by Art. 133(2) to appoint a 
representative, this was done in due time (Rule 152 (3) and (6)). 
If any of these requirements are not met, the request is deemed not to have 
been filed. This finding is notified to the requester (Art. 119), and the fee is 
refunded. 
Otherwise, the request is considered to have been filed, and the 
limitation/revocation procedure commences. 
Rule 91 
Art. 105a 
Part D – Chapter X-2 

 
 
2.2 Deficiencies which, if not remedied, lead to the request being 
rejected as inadmissible 
The formalities officer will furthermore examine whether: 
(i) 
the request is filed in writing (Rule 92(1)) 
(ii) 
the request includes the particulars of the requester required by 
Rule 92(2)(a), referring to Rule 41(2)(c) 
(iii) 
the request indicates in which contracting states the requester is the 
patent proprietor (Rule 92(2)(a)) 
(iv) 
the request indicates the number of the patent to be limited or 
revoked (Rule 92(2)(b)) 
(v) 
the request indicates in which contracting states the patent has taken 
effect, even if in the meantime it has lapsed in one or more of those 
contracting states (Rule 92(2)(b)) 
(vi) 
in cases (iii) and (v), and if the requester is not the patent proprietor 
for all these contracting states, the requester provides the names and 
addresses of the other patent proprietors, and evidence of 
entitlement to act on their behalf (Rule 92(2)(c)); due to the 
retroactive effect of a limitation/revocation (Art. 68), such evidence is 
required also in the case where the patent has lapsed in one or more 
of the contracting states referred to under (v) in the meantime. Note 
that in the case of joint patent proprietors, whether for the same or 
different contracting states, the requirements of Rule 151 for 
appointment of a common representative also apply in the limitation 
or revocation procedure (see A-VIII, 1.3) 
(vii) 
where limitation is sought, the request includes the complete version 
of the amended claims (and of the description and drawings where 
applicable) (Rule 92(2)(d)) 
(viii) if the requester has appointed a representative, the particulars 
according to Rule 41(2)(d) (Rule 92(2)(e)) have been filed. 
If any of the above requirements are not met, the requester is invited to 
correct the deficiencies within a period to be specified. 
If the deficiencies are not corrected within this period, the request is to be 
rejected as inadmissible. This decision is notified to the requester 
(Art. 119). Re-establishment of rights under Art. 122 is, however, available. 
The decision rejecting the request is open to appeal (Art. 106(1)). 
Otherwise, the request is deemed admissible. 
3. Decision on request for revocation 
If the request is for revocation, and is admissible, the examining division will 
revoke the patent and communicate this to the requester (Art. 105b(2) and 
Rule 95(1)). The decision takes effect on the date on which it is published 
Rule 92 
Rule 94 
Art. 105b(2) 
Rule 95 
 

Part D – Chapter X-3 
 
in the Bulletin (Art. 105b(3)). In accordance with Art. 68, the effect of the 
decision is that the patent is revoked ab initio, conferring no rights under 
Art. 64 or 67. As stated in Art. 105b(3), the decision applies to all 
contracting states in respect of which the patent was granted. It is not 
possible for the patent to be revoked only for some contracting states, and 
not for others. 
4. Substantive examination (limitation) 
4.1 Department responsible 
If a request for limitation is deemed to be admissible, then the file will be 
forwarded to the examining division, as the department responsible for the 
examination of the request. 
4.2 Basis for the examination 
The basis for the examination is the patent as granted or amended in 
opposition or limitation proceedings (Rule 90). In cases in which there have 
already been both opposition and limitation procedures, or more than one 
limitation procedure, the basis for the examination is the patent as 
amended in the most recent of those procedures. 
The requester has the option of providing information (with the request, or 
later in the procedure) as to why the request is allowable, and/or as to the 
purpose behind the request, but there is no obligation to do so. The 
purpose underlying the request is, however, of no relevance to the question 
whether it is allowable. 
4.3 Scope of the examination 
The scope of the examination is limited by Rule 95(2). The examining 
division is required to decide only whether the amended claims of the 
request constitute a limitation with respect to the claims as granted or 
amended (i.e. those referred to in D-X, 4.2), and whether the amended 
claims comply with the requirements of Art. 84 and Art. 123(2) and (3). 
The term "limitation" is to be interpreted as meaning a reduction in the 
extent of protection conferred by the claims. Mere clarifications or changes 
made to protect a different subject ("aliud") are not to be considered as 
limitations. 
More particularly, the limitation of a dependent claim only, without any 
independent claim being limited, is acceptable. However, it is not 
permissible to introduce non-limiting amendments in the description or in 
the claims that are not a consequence of the limitation of the claims (for 
example tidying up unclear claims, making amendments to improve the 
patent or cosmetic changes). Likewise, adding dependent claims in 
limitation is not permissible if not directly caused by the limitation 
introduced in the claims. 
Amendments in a claim leading to a scope of protection which is smaller 
but falls partly outside the extent of protection conferred by the claim 
previously on file must be dealt with cautiously. Even if the amendment 
constitutes a limitation, such a claim would generally contravene Art. 123(3) 
Rule 91 
Rule 90 
Rule 95(2) 
Part D – Chapter X-4 

 
 
(see also H-V, 7, for Art. 123(3) in the case of a change of category of a 
claim). 
For interpretation of Art. 84 and Art. 123(2), see F-IV, 4 and H-IV, 5.4. The 
description and drawings are used to interpret the claims in accordance 
with Art. 69(1) and its Protocol on Interpretation. Amendments made to 
these parts might therefore introduce matter contrary to Art. 123(3) 
(see H-IV, 3.1 and 3.3). 
For the admissibility of a request for correction under Rule 139 of the 
documents making up the patent, see H-VI, 2.1.1. 
The filing of auxiliary requests together with a main request is possible 
(see H-III, 3). 
4.4 Further stages of the examination 
If the examination under D-X, 4.3 above leads to the conclusion that the 
request is allowable, then the next stage of the procedure – the 
establishment of the formal requirements for limitation as described under 
D-X, 5 can begin. Otherwise, in accordance with Rule 95(2), a 
communication must be sent to the requester identifying the deficiencies 
and giving the opportunity to correct them within a period to be specified. 
The normal period is two months (Rule 132(2)). It is, in principle, 
extendable, but only under exceptional circumstances. 
The division may not adapt the description of its own motion (see D-X, 5). 
In the case of discrepancy between the claims and the description, an 
objection will always be raised. 
If the requester responds in due time in a manner such that no objections 
remain, then the procedure continues as in D-X, 5. 
Rule 95(2) provides for only one opportunity to make amendments during 
limitation. However, if the response to the communication under Rule 95(2) 
overcomes the objections raised in that communication, but gives rise to 
new objections, the fundamental principle of the right to be heard under 
Art. 113(1) will normally make a further communication necessary in order 
to communicate the new objections to the requester before the decision to 
reject the request for limitation is issued (see D-X, 6). Normally, no further 
amendments may be made in reply to that communication. 
Rule 95(2) specifies that the examining division must give the requester 
one opportunity to correct the deficiencies. However, any request for oral 
proceedings according to Art. 116 will be granted if the division does not 
consider the request for limitation to be allowable. No further amendments 
may be submitted during oral proceedings if the opportunity to make 
amendments has already been taken. 
4.5 Third-party observations during the examination 
Art. 115 explicitly covers all proceedings before the EPO, not just pre-grant 
proceedings. Accordingly, its provisions also apply in principle to revocation 
and limitation proceedings. Patentability under Art. 115 is to be interpreted 
Art. 69(1) 
Rule 139 
Art. 115 
Rule 114 
 

Part D – Chapter X-5 
 
in a broader sense, so that issues relating to Art. 84 and Art. 123(2) may 
also be taken into consideration. Requesters could, when responding to an 
invitation under Rule 95(2), introduce further restrictions intended to 
address such observations. If they wish to do this, and no invitation under 
Rule 95(2) is issued, their only option is to file a further request for 
limitation. 
5. Formal procedure for limitation when the request is allowable 
If the request for limitation is allowable, then according to Rule 95(3) the 
examining division must communicate this to the requesters and invite 
them to pay the prescribed fee and file translations of the amended claims 
into the other two official languages within a period of three months. 
The nature of the communication under Rule 95(3) inviting the requester to 
pay the prescribed fee and file translations of the claims is different from 
the communication of the intention to grant during examination proceedings 
under Rule 71(3). During limitation, the text filed by the requester is 
deemed to be approved, whereas at this stage in examination the text is a 
version proposed to the applicants and subject to their approval. 
Once the communication under Rule 95(3) is received, the requester can 
only pay the fee and file the translations or have the request rejected for 
failure to do so. Therefore, the examining division may not, with the 
communication under Rule 95(3), make amendments of its own motion to 
the claims of a request for limitation in order to render them allowable or 
adapt the description of its own motion to the limited claim(s). The 
provisions of Art. 113 would not be met, since the requester does not have 
an opportunity to contest or comment on the amendments made. 
As in opposition proceedings, the requester benefits from a two-month 
period of grace for reply with payment of a surcharge (Art. 2(1), 
item 9, RFees). Reestablishment of rights is available. 
If the requester pays the fee and files the required translations in due time, 
the examining division will decide to limit the patent (Art. 105b(2) and 
Rule 95(3), last sentence). This takes effect on the date on which the 
mention of the decision is published in the Bulletin. 
As soon as possible after this, the amended specification will be published 
by the EPO. The form of publication of the amended patent specification is 
defined in Rule 96, Rule 73(2) and (3) and Rule 74. The procedure for this 
is the same as in opposition proceedings. 
As for revocation (see D-X, 3), the effect of the decision to limit the patent is 
that the patent is limited ab initio. 
6. Rejection of the request 
If: 
(i) 
the requester does not respond in due time to the invitation under 
Rule 95(2) (see D-X, 4.4 above); or 
Rule 95(3) 
Art. 2(1), item 8 and 
item 9, RFees 
Art. 105b(2) and (3) 
Art. 105c 
Art. 68 
Part D – Chapter X-6 

 
 
(ii) 
the requester responds in due time, but the request is still not 
allowable; or 
(iii) 
the requester fails to pay the fee(s) and file the translation according 
to Rule 95(3) (see D-X, 5 above), 
then the examining division will reject the request (Art. 105b(2), last 
sentence and Rule 95(4)), provided the requirements of Art. 113(1) are met 
(see D-X, 4.4). 
The decision to reject the request will be notified in accordance with 
Art. 119 to the requester. 
In case (ii), the decision is a reasoned decision taken by the examining 
division and is subject to appeal. 
7. Relation to opposition proceedings 
7.1 Precedence of opposition proceedings 
The case in which opposition proceedings are already pending when the 
request for revocation or limitation is filed has been mentioned in D-X, 2.1. 
In the opposite case, i.e. where an opposition is filed while revocation or 
limitation proceedings are pending, the procedure depends on whether the 
pending proceedings relate to a request for revocation or for limitation. 
According to Rule 93(2), if the pending proceedings relate to a request for 
limitation, the examining division will terminate those proceedings and order 
the reimbursement of the limitation fee. The limitation procedure is 
terminated on the day the decision on the limitation procedure is handed 
over to the internal EPO postal service. If the requester has already paid 
the fee referred to in Rule 95(3) (see D-X, 5), this fee will also be refunded. 
The opposition procedure will then continue in the normal manner. 
The decision to terminate the limitation proceedings is notified to the 
requester (Art. 119). 
Rule 93(2) is restricted to limitation proceedings. Therefore, in the case of 
revocation proceedings, there is no precedence of opposition. Revocation 
proceedings continue after an opposition is filed, and the case proceeds to 
opposition only if the request for revocation is deemed not to have been 
filed, is rejected as inadmissible or is withdrawn. Otherwise, if the patent is 
revoked, the opponent(s) will be informed of this situation and the 
opposition proceedings will be terminated. 
7.2 Filing of opposition after decision on limitation 
On rare occasions it may happen that the limitation procedure is finished 
before an opposition is filed within the nine-month period and the decision 
to limit has already been published in the European Patent Bulletin. In such 
cases the opponent does not benefit from a new nine-month period, since 
the opposition period runs only once from publication of the mention of the 
grant of the patent. Accordingly, the opponent will not have a full nine-
month period to formulate the opposition for the patent as limited. 
Rule 111(2) 
Art. 106(1) 
Rule 93(1) 
Rule 93(2) 
 

Part D – Chapter X-7 
 
8. Legal status of decisions 
The decisions rejecting the request for limitation or revocation as either 
inadmissible or not allowable (see D-X, 2 and 6) are open to appeal, as 
they are decisions of the examining division terminating a procedure. 
Accordingly, they are decisions listed as such in Art. 21(3)(a). 
9. Withdrawal of the request 
In the absence of any provision to the contrary and in accordance with 
normal legal principles, the requester may withdraw the request for 
limitation or revocation at any time, provided that the request is still 
pending. In this case, however, the limitation or revocation fee will not be 
refunded. 
10. Different sets of claims 
Art. 105b(3) specifies that the decision to limit or revoke will apply to the 
patent in all contracting states for which it has been granted. There is thus 
a single decision, covering all contracting states, but this decision may 
include different sets of claims for different contracting states, or determine 
that the limitation is in other ways different for different contracting states. 
Such situations could arise in two different sets of circumstances. 
10.1 Limitation results in the claims becoming different in different 
contracting states 
The limitation could result in the claims becoming different in different 
contracting states if the requester wishes to restrict the claims with respect 
to one or more, but not all, contracting states in order to avoid conflict with 
national prior rights. Such different sets of claims can be allowed, provided 
that the substantive requirements are met for all sets for which the 
requester is seeking an amendment. 
It follows from Rule 138 that a prerequisite for the introduction of different 
claims for different contracting states during the limitation procedure is that 
requesters inform the EPO of the existence of the national prior rights when 
filing the different sets of claims. If they file different sets of claims without 
informing the EPO of the national prior rights, then the request is to be 
refused under Art. 105b(3) and Rule 138. 
For applications filed on or after 13.12.2007, different sets of claims can no 
longer be justified on the basis of prior art under Art. 54(3) (for transitional 
provisions, however, see D-VII, 8). 
10.2 Limitation is different for different contracting states because the 
claims as granted were different for different contracting states 
The limitation is different in different contracting states because the claims 
forming the basis of the limitation procedure were different in different 
contracting states. This situation would occur where the patent has different 
claims for different contracting states, e.g. because of national prior rights 
or prior art under Art. 54(3) (for patents granted before 13.12.2007 or for 
patents granted in respect of European patent applications pending at that 
time), or where under Art. 61 a partial transfer of rights has taken place 
(Rule 18(2)). 
Art. 106(1) 
Art. 105b(3) 
Rule 138 
Art. 54(3) 
Part D – Chapter X-8 

 
 
The requester might wish to apply a limitation already introduced for one or 
more contracting states to the other contracting states, or to bring the 
claims into line with each other for a different reason. If this results in a 
single set of claims for all contracting states, and the substantive 
requirements are met separately for each different set of original claims, 
then the request would be allowable. 
Note that it would also be possible that the circumstances of this paragraph 
and paragraph D-X, 10.1 coexist in a single request. 
11. Multiple requests 
Rule 90 defines that the basis for the request can be the claims as 
amended in limitation proceedings, thus providing for multiple subsequent 
requests, i.e. a request for limitation or revocation following one or more 
earlier requests for limitation.  
Rule 90 
 
 
Part E – Chapter I-1 
 
Chapter I – Introduction 
Part E contains guidelines for those procedural steps in respect of the 
examination of European patent applications and patents which without 
major variations may, in so far as the EPC permits, occur at a number of 
stages in the procedure. Attention is also drawn to Art. 125, which states: 
"In the absence of procedural provisions in this Convention, the EPO shall 
take into account the principles of procedural law generally recognised in 
the Contracting States". 
 

Part E – Chapter II-1 
 
Chapter II – Communications and notifications 
1. Communications 
1.1 General remarks 
Communications are sent, inter alia: 
(i) 
if a party has to be informed of deficiencies, together, where 
appropriate, with a request to remedy those deficiencies, e.g. in 
accordance with Rule 55, 58, 59, 62a, 63, 64(1), 71(1), 77(2), 95(2) 
or 108(2); 
(ii) 
if a party is to be invited to file observations on particular questions or 
to submit documents, evidence, etc., to clarify the issues involved; 
(iii) 
if, in the opinion of the examining or opposition division, the patent 
cannot be granted or maintained in the text requested by the 
applicant or proprietor of the patent, but could possibly be granted or 
maintained in an amended text of more limited scope; 
(iv) 
if information necessary to the conduct of the proceedings has to be 
communicated to the parties, e.g. in accordance with Rule 14(2) and 
(3), 35(4) or 142(2) and (3); 
(v) 
for preparing oral proceedings, (see E-III, 5); or 
(vi) 
if a decision is to be based on grounds on which the parties have not 
yet had an opportunity to comment (see E-X, 1). 
1.2 Number of communications 
Since each communication issued may entail prolonging the proceedings, 
the proceedings are conducted in such a way as to manage with as few 
communications as possible. If a communication has to be issued, it will 
cover all the points which are necessary, or likely to be of importance, for 
the particular stage of the proceedings, e.g. the preparation of oral 
proceedings or of a decision. 
1.3 Form of decisions, communications and notices 
Any decision, communication or notice from the EPO is to be signed by and 
to state the name of the employee responsible. Where these documents 
are produced by the employee responsible using a computer, a seal may 
replace the signature. Where the documents are produced automatically by 
a computer the employee's name may also be dispensed with. The same 
applies to pre-printed notices and communications. 
2. Notification 
2.1 General remarks 
The EPO as a matter of course notifies those concerned of decisions and 
summonses, and of any notice or other communication from which a time 
limit is reckoned, or of which those concerned must be notified under other 
provisions of the EPC, or of which notification has been ordered by the 
Rule 113(1) and (2) 
Art. 119 
Rule 125 
Rule 126 
Rule 127 
Part E – Chapter II-2 

 
 
President of the EPO; other communications are not subject to formal 
notification. 
Notifications may, where exceptional circumstances so require, be given 
through the intermediary of the central industrial property offices of the 
contracting states. 
In proceedings before the EPO, any notification to be made must take the 
form of the original document, or a copy thereof certified by or bearing the 
seal of the EPO, or a computer print-out bearing such seal, or an electronic 
document containing such seal or otherwise certified. Copies of documents 
emanating from the parties themselves do not require such certification. 
2.2 Method of notification 
Notification is to be made by postal services, by delivery on the premises of 
the EPO, by public notice or, if so agreed by the addressee, by means of 
electronic communication as determined by the President of the EPO and 
under the conditions laid down by him governing their use. Further details 
concerning notifications are given in Rules 126 to 129. Notification through 
the central industrial property office of a contracting state competent to deal 
with the addressee must be made in accordance with the provisions 
applicable to that office in national proceedings. 
2.3 Electronic notification 
Where a user has agreed to receive communications electronically, the 
electronic document is deemed to be delivered to the addressee on the 
date it bears unless it has failed to reach its destination.  
Even if the addressee can access the electronic document before the date 
of the document, the decisive date for the purpose of the notification fiction 
under Rule 127(2) is the date of the document. 
In the event of any dispute concerning the delivery of the electronic 
document, it is incumbent on the EPO to establish that the document has 
reached its destination and to establish the date on which it did so. 
If notification is contested and the EPO establishes that the document 
reached its destination more than seven days after the date it bears, a 
period triggered by the deemed receipt of that document will be extended 
by the number of days by which these seven days were exceeded (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 6 March 2023, OJ EPO 2023, A29). Rule 134(1) 
applies only once the period is extended according to the safeguard under 
Rule 127(2). See E-II, 2.4 for an example. 
Notification may occur in electronic form to an activated Mailbox. Electronic 
notification 
comprises 
the 
decisions, 
summonses, 
notices 
and 
communications contained in a list published on the EPO website. The 
Mailbox may also be accessed through MyEPO Portfolio. For further 
details, see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 9 October 2023 
concerning 
the 
web-based 
online 
service 
MyEPO Portfolio 
(OJ EPO 2023, A89) and the notice from the EPO dated 9 October 2023, 
(OJ EPO 2023, A90). 
Rule 125(2) and (3) 
Rule 127(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter II-3 
 
In the event that further means are introduced for electronic notification, the 
conditions and details will follow from the decisions governing the use of 
such means. 
2.4 Notification by postal services 
All notifications by postal services must be by registered letter (see also 
OJ EPO 2019, A57). The President of the EPO has, so far, not named any 
other documents to be notified by registered letter with advice of delivery or 
equivalent. 
A notified document is deemed to be delivered to the addressee on the 
date it bears unless it has failed to reach the addressee. In the case of 
notification irregularities, the safeguards set out in E-II, 2.3 apply. 
Example: 
An examination report under Art. 94(3) bears a date of 30 January 2024 
and sets a time limit of four months. The report is delivered on 3 
February 2024, which is four days after the date it bears. Thus, there will be 
no extension under the safeguard and the document will be deemed 
notified on 30 January 2024. The four-month period triggered by the 
notification on 30 January 2024 falls on 30 May 2024, on which no mail is 
delivered in Munich (public holiday). Consequently, the time limit is 
extended under Rule 134(1) until 31 May 2024. 
By contrast, if the document is delivered on 9 February 2024, i.e. ten days 
after the date it bears, the period will be extended by three days to expire 
on 2 June 2024 under Rule 126(2). Since 2 June 2024 is a Sunday, the 
period is further extended under Rule 134(1) to expire on 3 June 2024. 
Notification is deemed to have been effected, even if acceptance of the 
document has been refused. 
The law of the state on the territory of which the notification is made applies 
to other matters concerning notification, e.g. the question whether delivery 
to a person other than the addressee constitutes an effective notification to 
the latter. 
2.5 Notification to representatives 
If a representative has been appointed, notifications must be addressed to 
him. If several such representatives have been appointed for a single 
interested party, notification to any one of them is sufficient. If several 
persons are joint applicants for or proprietors of a patent or have acted in 
common in filing notice of opposition or intervention and have not appointed 
a common representative, notification of one person, viz. the person 
referred to in Rule 151, will again be sufficient. If several interested parties 
have a common representative, notification of a single document to the 
common representative is sufficient. 
2.6 Irregularities in the notification 
Where a document has reached the addressee, if the EPO is unable to 
prove that it has been duly notified, or if provisions relating to its notification 
Rule 126 
Rule 126(2) 
Rule 130 
Rule 125(4) 
Part E – Chapter II-4 

 
 
have not been observed, the document is deemed to have been notified on 
the date established by the EPO as the date of receipt. In cases where the 
EPO is not able to prove the actual date of notification, a letter, for instance, 
sent by the addressees themselves and indicating the date of receipt, is 
accepted as proof. If it is evident from a reply from the addressees that they 
have received the document, although they do not mention the date of its 
notification, the date on which that reply was written is to be regarded as 
the date of notification. 
 

Part E – Chapter III-1 
 
Chapter III – Oral proceedings 
1. General 
1.1 Introduction 
By "oral proceedings" is meant formal proceedings within the meaning of 
Art. 116. The term does not include consultations such as occur in 
examination 
proceedings 
and 
limitation/revocation 
proceedings 
(see C-VII, 2). In view of Rule 81(2), such consultations are not allowed in 
opposition proceedings in which more than one party is involved unless the 
consultations concern matters which do not affect the interests of other 
parties. An example is proceedings for examining the admissibility of 
opposition, provided this involves only the EPO and the opponent 
concerned. 
Oral proceedings will take place before the competent body, e.g. within the 
Receiving Section before the appointed officer and during the examination 
and opposition procedure before the whole division. 
In matters lying within its competence, oral proceedings can be held before 
the Legal Division. Such proceedings are non-public in both ex parte and 
inter partes proceedings. 
The right to oral proceedings forms a substantial part of the right to be 
heard under Art. 113. 
1.2 Format of oral proceedings 
Oral 
proceedings 
are 
held 
by 
videoconference. 
In 
exceptional 
circumstances, where there are serious reasons against holding the oral 
proceedings by videoconference, they may be held on the premises of the 
EPO, either at the request of a party or at the instigation of the division 
(OJ EPO 2022, A103, OJ EPO 2022, A106). Examples of serious reasons 
are, in particular, reasons relating to a participant to the oral proceedings as 
an 
individual 
(e.g. a 
proven 
visual 
impairment 
that 
prevents 
a 
representative from following oral proceedings on screen) and reasons 
related to the nature and subject-matter of the proceedings (e.g. where they 
involve the demonstration or inspection of an object where the haptic 
features are essential, to the extent that this is possible in accordance with 
the applicable provisions). Sweeping objections against the reliability of 
videoconferencing technology or the non-availability of videoconferencing 
equipment will, as a rule, not qualify as serious reasons in this regard. 
Participants must ensure that their videoconferencing equipment meets the 
technical requirements specified. They are encouraged to perform a test 
call well before the oral proceedings take place. 
In addition to the summons, participants will receive an email confirming the 
date, time and the videoconference contact details to be used to establish 
the connection (in the form of a link or by other suitable means) and 
containing any further appropriate information, including on the organisation 
of the videoconference. 
Art. 18(2) 
Art. 19(2) 
Art. 113 
Part E – Chapter III-2 

 
 
1.3 Request for oral proceedings to be held on EPO premises 
A request that oral proceedings be held by way of exception on the 
premises of the EPO needs to be filed as early as possible, preferably 
together with the request for oral proceedings. The granting of a request for 
oral proceedings to be held on the premises of the EPO will be at the 
discretion of the competent division. 
If the request for oral proceedings on the premises of the EPO cannot be 
allowed and is received after the summons to oral proceedings, the division 
will inform the parties that the oral proceedings will take place by 
videoconference as set out in the summons and include a brief reasoning 
as to why the request cannot be granted. If the request is received before 
the summons has been issued, the reasons for the refusal will be given in 
the annex to the summons. In either case, a refusal of this type is not 
separately appealable. 
If a request for oral proceedings on the premises of the EPO is allowable 
and is received after the summons to oral proceedings by videoconference 
has been issued, the parties will be informed that oral proceedings will be 
held on the premises of the EPO as requested; where possible, the date of 
the oral proceedings will remain unchanged. 
1.4 Request to hold on-site oral proceedings at a particular site 
A request to hold oral proceedings at a particular EPO site is not 
admissible; a refusal by the competent department to accept such a 
request is not subject to appeal (see T 1142/12). 
2. 
Oral proceedings at the request of a party 
If, in the course of proceedings, a party requests oral proceedings, the 
competent department must grant this request as further explained in this 
section. The EPO will not inform any party concerned of this right but will 
expect them – if they do not obtain satisfaction from the competent 
department – to request oral proceedings (if they so wish) before a decision 
is reached. 
Under Art. 116(1), parties can request oral proceedings at any time, 
provided a decision has not yet been issued. In particular, a request for oral 
proceedings made before the decision to grant or to limit has been handed 
over to the internal post has to be allowed (see T 556/95 and G 12/91). 
Oral proceedings will take place before the Receiving Section at the 
request of the applicant only where the Receiving Section considers this to 
be expedient or where it envisages refusing the European patent 
application. Where the Receiving Section does not consider it necessary to 
hold oral proceedings, it must inform the applicant accordingly 
(see J 16/02). 
The competent department will decide on the most appropriate date for the 
oral proceedings, which will only be held after the issues to be determined 
are sufficiently clear (see E-III, 5). 
Art. 116(1) 
Art. 116(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter III-3 
 
With a conditional request for oral proceedings, i.e. if any party concerned 
has indicated that the request for oral proceedings has been made solely 
as a precaution to cover the eventuality that the case they have put forward 
is not accepted, oral proceedings will be held only if a negative decision 
against the party concerned is envisaged. 
With an unconditional request for oral proceedings, if the competent 
department considers that a decision on the matter may be reached on the 
basis of the written evidence on file and intends to take a decision (e.g. in 
accordance with Art. 97, 101 or 105b) which fully concurs with the case put 
forward by the party or parties having unconditionally requested the oral 
proceedings, and providing there is no valid request for oral proceedings 
from a party adversely affected by the decision envisaged, the decision 
may be issued in writing without oral proceedings being held (T 1050/09). 
2.1 Request for oral proceedings by an opponent whose opposition 
is to be rejected as inadmissible or is deemed not to have been filed 
Under Art. 116(1), oral proceedings may be requested only by a party to 
pending proceedings. If the opposition division notes deficiencies in the 
notice of opposition under Rule 77(1), any opponent still remains a party to 
the proceedings until such time as their opposition is rejected as 
inadmissible. This also applies when deficiencies lead to the opposition 
being deemed not to have been filed (see D-IV, 1.4.1). 
3. Request for further oral proceedings 
The EPO may reject a request for further oral proceedings before the same 
department where the parties and the subject of the proceedings are the 
same, irrespective of the form in which the oral proceedings were held. 
Oral proceedings, particularly in opposition proceedings, are held to give 
the opportunity to finally discuss all matters raised and are normally 
terminated with a decision announced orally. The division is bound by that 
decision, once announced, and it cannot reopen the proceedings to allow 
further submissions to be filed or to take into account new facts (see the 
last two paragraphs of E-VI, 2). Only if the division, in the oral proceedings, 
has not announced a decision, but has decided to continue the proceedings 
in writing, can further submissions be examined. Such may be the case 
e.g. when the examining division indicates that it intends to grant a patent 
(or to limit a granted patent in limitation proceedings) on the basis of the 
documents filed during the oral proceedings. 
Thus, as a rule, in examination, limitation or opposition proceedings there 
will be no justification for further oral proceedings, for example where one 
of the parties wishes to re-examine from a different viewpoint a subject 
already discussed in the course of the proceedings, either before or during 
the original oral proceedings. However, if the oral proceedings are not 
terminated with a decision and after the oral proceedings the subject of the 
proceedings changes, for example where fresh evidence is admitted into 
the proceedings after the original oral proceedings, then further oral 
proceedings will generally have to be held if requested (see T 194/96). 
Art. 116(1) 
Part E – Chapter III-4 

 
 
4. 
Oral proceedings at the instance of the EPO 
The competent department of the EPO may arrange for oral proceedings to 
take place without a request from a party if it considers this to be expedient. 
Oral proceedings will normally only be expedient if after an attempt at 
written clarification there are still questions or doubts which have a crucial 
bearing on the decision to be reached and which may be more efficiently or 
surely settled by oral discussion with the party or parties, or if it is 
necessary 
to 
take 
evidence 
as 
part 
of 
oral 
proceedings 
(see E-IV, 1.3 and 1.6.1). The competent department will also bear in mind 
the need for economy in such procedures, since oral proceedings give rise 
to costs for both the EPO and the party or parties. 
5. 
Preparation of oral proceedings 
The purpose of oral proceedings is to settle as far as possible all 
outstanding questions relevant to the decision. To this end proceedings will 
be carefully prepared after examination of all the written matter submitted 
and with this in mind the most appropriate date for conducting oral 
proceedings is chosen. 
When preparing oral proceedings, particularly in opposition, the division 
considers carefully whether complex legal issues are likely to arise, and it 
may therefore decide to enlarge the division by adding a legally qualified 
member (Art. 18(2) and 19(2)). 
In so far as certain questions relevant to the decision are considered by the 
EPO to require discussion, it will in many cases be expedient to inform the 
party or parties in a notice and possibly also to invite one or more of the 
parties to submit written observations or to produce evidence, where 
appropriate. Parties may produce evidence in support of their arguments on 
their own initiative. Where, however, the evidence is such that it should 
have been put forward at an earlier stage, e.g. in opposition proceedings 
pursuant to D-IV, 1.2.2.1(v) and 5.4, it is for the competent body to consider 
whether the evidence not filed in due time is to be admitted (see E-VI, 2). 
Any observations should be received in time for them to be communicated 
to the other parties at the latest one month before the oral proceedings. 
The time limit for submission of observations is fixed accordingly, 
particularly where the invitation to file observations is issued at the same 
time as the summons to oral proceedings. 
5.1 When can a summons to oral proceedings be issued in 
substantive examination? 
See C-VIII, 5.1 for when a summons to oral proceedings can be issued in 
examination proceedings. 
6. 
Summons to oral proceedings 
All parties must be duly summoned to oral proceedings by notification. The 
summons must state the subject, the date and time and the form of the oral 
proceedings. 
The division sets a single date for the oral proceedings, i.e. one day or, in 
particular cases, more than one consecutive day. No pre-announcement of 
Art. 116(1) 
Rule 115(1) 
Art. 119 
 

Part E – Chapter III-5 
 
the date will be made. Oral proceedings may be set for any working day on 
which the EPO is open at the relevant site. 
The summons will be accompanied by a note drawing attention to the 
points which need to be discussed, normally containing the provisional and 
non-binding opinion of the division. New documents may be cited in the 
annex to the summons (T 120/12), together with an explanation of their 
significance. 
However, 
examiners 
must 
carefully 
consider 
on 
a 
case-by-case basis whether citing a new document would introduce a new 
line of argument. At an early stage in the procedure, they must consider 
sending a further communication before issuing any summons if a new 
document needs to be cited. For the additional requirements of the 
accompanying note if the summons is issued as the first action in 
examination, see C-III, 5. The summons as well as the annexed 
communication can only be appealed together with the final decision unless 
a separate appeal is allowed (see E-X, 3). 
The summons will also fix a date up to which written submissions may be 
filed or amendments which meet the requirements of the EPC may be 
submitted (see also D-VI, 3.2). 
Rule 115(1) stipulates that at least two months' notice of the summons 
must be given unless the parties agree to a shorter period. Such agreement 
must be present in the public part of the file. 
Harmonised with the standards applied in the written procedure 
(E-VIII, 1.2), the practice outlined below is followed in setting the date of the 
oral proceedings to allow the parties sufficient time for preparing and filing 
submissions: 
(i) 
Any time limit (even shorter than two months) may be set provided 
that prior agreement has been reached with the parties. 
(ii) 
Normally, the summons is issued at least four months ahead of the 
day of the oral proceedings in examination and at least six months 
ahead of the day of the oral proceedings in opposition. 
(iii) 
Between two and four months' notice can be given without 
preliminary agreement only in specific circumstances, since the 
parties would have very limited time for filing submissions before the 
date fixed in the summons. Examples are where, in examination, the 
summons follows an extensive exchange between the first examiner 
and the applicant, where oral proceedings have been adjourned due 
to a lack of time, or where the date of the oral proceedings is 
changed to a later date (see also E-III, 7.1.3). 
(iv) 
Where the summons is issued as the first action in examination, 
six months are foreseen between the despatch of the summons and 
the date of the oral proceedings (see C-III, 5). 
Rule 116(1) 
Rule 115(1) 
Part E – Chapter III-6 

 
 
The summons must state that if parties duly summoned do not appear as 
summoned or fail to connect to the oral proceeding by videoconference, as 
the case may be, the proceedings may continue without them. 
In opposition proceedings, where multiple oppositions have been filed, as a 
rule, a single hearing in oral proceedings is scheduled, even if the 
oppositions are based on different grounds (see D-I, 6). This means that all 
the parties must be summoned to attend them and may present comments 
on all grounds raised. 
7. 
Change of date, cancellation or maintenance of oral proceedings 
7.1 Changing the date of oral proceedings 
7.1.1 Requests to change the date of oral proceedings 
A request to change the date of oral proceedings is allowable only if the 
party concerned can advance serious reasons which justify the fixing of a 
new date (see T 1080/99, T 300/04, J 4/03 and T 178/03). The request to 
fix another date must be filed as soon as possible after the grounds 
preventing the party concerned from attending the oral proceedings have 
arisen. It must be accompanied by a sufficiently substantiated written 
statement indicating these reasons (see OJ EPO 2009, 68; see also 
T 178/03) and appropriate evidence, where necessary. 
Serious reasons to request a change of the date for oral proceedings may 
be, for instance: 
– 
a previously notified summons to oral proceedings of the same party 
in other proceedings before the EPO, the Unified Patent Court or a 
national court or patent office 
– 
for the same date or 
– 
for the preceding or following day or 
– 
for at least one of the two preceding or two following days 
where participation in the oral proceedings requires travelling 
to or from a geographically distant location, 
– 
serious illness, 
– 
a death within the family, 
– 
the marriage of a person whose attendance in oral proceedings is 
relevant, 
– 
military service or other obligatory performance of civic duties, 
– 
business trips which have been firmly booked before notification of 
the summons to oral proceedings, 
 

Part E – Chapter III-7 
 
– 
holidays which have already been firmly booked before notification of 
the summons to oral proceedings. In the case of holidays scheduled 
but not yet booked, the representative must indicate the 
circumstances (e.g. school holidays) which prevent the holidays from 
being rescheduled. 
If the grounds for changing the date of the oral proceedings submitted by a 
party do not meet the above criteria, the division will inform the parties that 
the oral proceedings will take place as set out in the summons and annex a 
brief reasoning as to why in its view the criteria are not met. 
The reasons that can be invoked to change the date only apply to those 
participants whose presence is essential to the oral proceedings, e.g. the 
representative or a witness. 
If during the procedure substantive submissions were made by several 
representatives of a firm, an indication must be given why none of those 
who previously made such submissions can present the case at the oral 
proceedings, i.e. why the representative who cannot attend is essential or 
why the others are also unable to attend. 
In opposition proceedings, in particular if more than one opponent is 
involved, a more strict approach may be applied to prevent a series of 
changes of date (see T 1102/03). 
Grounds which, as a rule, are not acceptable are, for instance: 
– 
a summons to oral proceedings before the EPO or a national court 
notified after the summons in the relevant proceedings, 
– 
excessive work pressure. 
As Mondays and Fridays are normal working days, oral proceedings will be 
scheduled for these days, too. The fact that this may necessitate travel at 
weekends is not a sufficient reason to change the date of the oral 
proceedings. The departments of first instance will however, circumstances 
permitting, try to be flexible where there is a request to change the starting 
time in order to enable the party to travel on the same day. 
7.1.2 Change of date of oral proceedings at the instigation of the 
division 
In exceptional cases the division might have to instigate the change of date 
of oral proceedings for reasons similar to those mentioned above. The date 
of the oral proceedings will, however, be changed only if a suitable 
replacement cannot be found. 
7.1.3 Change of date of oral proceedings – defined notice period 
The notice period defined in Rule 115(1), i.e. at least two months, is valid 
also in the case of a change of date unless the parties have agreed on a 
shorter period (see also E-III, 6(iii) and E-III, 8.11.1). 
Part E – Chapter III-8 

 
 
7.2 Cancellation or maintenance of oral proceedings 
7.2.1 General 
In response to submissions made by a party in reply to the summons to 
oral proceedings, the division may also decide to cancel the oral 
proceedings and continue the procedure in writing. If it takes such a 
decision, it notifies the parties accordingly. In the absence of such 
notification, the parties must be aware that oral proceedings will be held. 
However, as an additional service in examination proceedings, if oral 
proceedings are not cancelled following such submissions, the division 
informs the applicant that the date and time set for the oral proceedings are 
maintained. 
7.2.2 Withdrawal of the request for oral proceedings 
If the request for oral proceedings is explicitly withdrawn, or if a written 
statement is to be interpreted as equivalent to a withdrawal of the request 
for oral proceedings (because the party has indicated that it will not attend 
– see T 3/90, T 696/02 and T 1027/03 – or has requested a decision 
according to the state of the file – see OJ EPO 2020, A124), it is within the 
discretion of the division to decide whether the scheduled oral proceedings 
are to be maintained or to be cancelled. 
If the division decides that oral proceedings are nevertheless to be 
conducted, this means that there are objections still outstanding that need 
to be discussed at the oral proceedings. Consequently the applicant and/or 
patentee can expect that problems relating to the requests filed in reply to 
the summons to oral proceedings will be dealt with at the oral proceedings. 
If any applicant or patentee decides not to attend the oral proceedings, they 
are thereby choosing not to make use of the opportunity to comment at the 
oral proceedings on any of the objections, but to rely on the arguments as 
set out in the written submissions. The decision may be given orally in their 
absence. The procedural principles require that the party to the 
proceedings is not taken by surprise by the decision (see also E-III, 8.3.3). 
8. 
Conduct of oral proceedings 
8.1 Admission of the public to proceedings 
Oral proceedings before the Receiving Section, the examining divisions 
and the Legal Division are not public. 
Oral proceedings, including delivery of the decision (see E-III, 9), are public 
before the opposition divisions in so far as the opposition division does not 
decide otherwise in cases where admission of the public could have 
serious and unjustified disadvantages, in particular for a party to the 
proceedings. This could, for example, be the case if any of the parties 
wishes to give information about sales figures or other commercial secrets 
in support of their case. Generally, the public will only be excluded whilst 
such information is being given. The public is also excluded during 
discussions about a request for exclusion of a document from file 
inspection (see D-II, 4.3) and when a decision on the matter is pronounced. 
The parties other than the requester(s), as well as their representatives, 
Art. 116(3) 
Art. 116(4) 
 

Part E – Chapter III-9 
 
may also be excluded as being part of the public (e.g. in the case of a 
request for exclusion of a medical certificate from file inspection). 
Members of the public may be granted remote access to opposition oral 
proceedings via a link provided upon request. See OJ EPO 2022, A106, for 
details about the request and the conditions. 
8.2 Conduct of oral proceedings 
Before the Receiving Section oral proceedings will be conducted by the 
appointed officer and before the examining or opposition divisions by the 
chair of the division concerned. Before the Legal Division, oral proceedings 
will be conducted by one legally qualified member of the Legal Division. 
The responsibilities of the person conducting the proceedings will include 
keeping order and conducting the proceedings as regards their formal and 
substantive aspects. 
The person conducting the proceedings must in particular ensure that, 
where necessary, a list is prepared of all disputed or unclear points relevant 
to the decision to be reached, that these are discussed and that the party or 
parties have the opportunity of commenting on them. In the case of oral 
proceedings by videoconference, the person conducting them must 
ascertain that no technical problems have prevented the oral proceedings 
from being conducted in accordance with the right to be heard and the right 
to oral proceedings (see E-III, 8.2.3). 
On the other hand, the oral proceedings are to be conducted strictly and 
efficiently, so that the submissions of the party or parties and the 
discussions are not unnecessarily digressive and do not deal with points 
which are of no relevance to the decision to be reached. Repetition is to be 
avoided as far as possible. In particular, written material submitted at the 
appropriate time to the competent department and to the party or parties 
which has already been the subject of proceedings need not be read out 
in extenso. A simple reference to such written material may suffice. 
8.2.1 Participation of parties and their representatives from different 
locations 
A party, its representative and any persons accompanying the parties or 
representatives, as well as witnesses and experts, may connect to the 
videoconference from different locations. 
8.2.2 Participation of members of the division from different 
locations 
The members of the examining and opposition divisions may equally 
connect to the oral proceedings by videoconference from different 
locations. In such cases, the members of the division will deliberate and 
vote among themselves via a separate communication channel. The venue 
of oral proceedings will be deemed to be the location where the division is 
set up. 
The applicant or representative will be informed of the remote participation 
of the members of the division at the beginning of the oral proceedings, 
Part E – Chapter III-10 

 
 
after the connection has been established and before they are formally 
opened. 
8.2.3 Technical problems 
Where technical problems occur such that the oral proceedings held by 
videoconference cannot be conducted openly and fairly, for example due to 
a total or partial breakdown in communication, the right to be heard might 
possibly be violated (Art. 113(1)). The parties, due to the technical 
problems, might be taken by surprise by the grounds mentioned in an 
adverse decision on which they have not had an opportunity to comment.  
If the sound or image transmission of any of the participants taking part in 
the oral proceedings is lost, the chair will stop the proceedings until the 
transmission is re-established. 
If a participant is disconnected for more than a few minutes, a member of 
the division will contact that party to see if they are having technical 
problems. Any relevant information will be shared with all parties. 
If a party reconnects after a temporary connection failure, the chair will 
make sure that no information has been missed. Some arguments might 
have to be repeated. 
If, despite all efforts of the participants, technical problems prevent the oral 
proceedings by videoconference from being conducted in accordance with 
the parties' rights under Art. 113 and Art. 116, the videoconference will be 
terminated. A new summons to oral proceedings will be issued. As a rule, 
new oral proceedings will be held by videoconference unless there are 
serious reasons for not doing so (E-III, 1.2). 
8.2.4 Recording 
The recording of oral proceedings by the parties is not permitted (see 
E-III, 10.1). At the beginning of the videoconference, the chair will therefore 
remind all participants that recording of the videoconference is prohibited. 
8.3 Opening of oral proceedings; non-appearance of a party 
8.3.1 Checking the identity and authorisations of participants at oral 
proceedings 
The division will check the ID document of one representative or authorised 
employee of each party unless this person is personally known. For other 
representatives, authorised employees and accompanying persons 
(including those who will be making oral submissions, see E-III, 8.5) 
present for a given party, it is sufficient that their identity is confirmed orally 
by the person whose ID documents were checked or who is personally 
known to at least one member of the division. This applies independently of 
whether a representative is a professional representative or a legal 
practitioner. Equally, if a party is not represented but personally present 
together with an accompanying person, it is sufficient to check the ID 
document of that party. 
OJ EPO 2022, A103 
 

Part E – Chapter III-11 
 
However, the division checks the ID documents of all parties, witnesses 
and experts summoned to give evidence before the EPO. Moreover, the 
division may check ID documents of other attendees where this is 
considered necessary, e.g. because the identity of an accompanying 
person is challenged by another party or where the division has serious 
doubts about the identity of the person. 
The identity document may be presented in one of following ways: 
– 
If the identity document is an EPO badge, by showing it to the 
camera at the beginning of the videoconference in the public meeting 
room. 
– 
If the identity document is a national ID card or passport, by showing 
it to a member of the division in a separate non-public meeting room. 
–  
By sending a copy to the email address provided to the parties at the 
beginning of the oral proceedings. 
– 
By using the EPO online filing options up to two days prior to the oral 
proceedings. 
For data protection reasons, copies of identification documents sent by 
email are deleted and not included in the file; copies submitted via the EPO 
online filing options are placed in the non-public part of the file. 
In order for the division to be able to confirm the identity of the person 
concerned, the full name (first name and surname) and the picture of the ID 
should be visible. All the other information on the identity document can be 
kept hidden if so wished, as long as it is possible to recognise that it is an 
official identity document. 
Professional representatives need to file authorisations only in exceptional 
cases (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007, 
Special edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, L.1). 
Authorisations need be checked only if a party is represented by a person 
whose authorisation is not apparent from the file. If it is established that the 
person is either 
(i) 
a professional representative acting under a sub-authorisation 
(ii) 
a professional representative from the same agency as the 
representative acting in the case, or 
(iii) 
a natural person (e.g. executive director) authorised by law in the 
party's country of business to act on behalf of that party 
then no further check is required. 
Part E – Chapter III-12 

 
 
If however the person is: 
(a) 
a professional representative who is neither from the same agency 
nor acting under a sub-authorisation, and his/her attendance at the 
oral proceedings is his/her first appearance in the procedure, or 
(b) 
a legal practitioner or a party's employee who is not an authorised 
professional representative 
then the procedure is as follows: 
In case (a), the division will check the file to see whether the previous 
representative's authorisation has lapsed. A change in representative or the 
termination of the authorisation of a previous representative may have been 
effected via an electronic notification through the My Files service 
(see OJ EPO 2012, 352). If the previous representative's authorisation has 
lapsed, no further action is required. If not, the representative concerned 
will be requested to provide a reference to a registered general 
authorisation or to file an individual authorisation. 
In case (b), the division will request the person concerned to provide a 
reference to a registered general authorisation or to file – by email in the 
case of oral proceedings by videoconference (OJ EPO 2020, A71) – an 
individual authorisation. 
Any person without an authorisation will be requested to submit one without 
delay. If they are unable to do so straight away, a time limit of two months 
will be set for its submission. The fact that the authorisation was missing, 
and the time limit set for submitting it, must be recorded in the minutes. The 
proceedings then continue in the normal way, except that no decision can 
be pronounced at the end. Instead, the decision is issued in writing once 
the missing authorisation has been filed. At the end of the proceedings, the 
party concerned must be reminded to file the authorisation. 
8.3.2 Opening the oral proceedings 
After opening the oral proceedings any person conducting them will 
introduce the parties present. They will have the particulars of the persons 
taking part in the proceedings recorded and will establish in what capacity 
they are present. Details of these steps and any consequences thereof will 
be recorded in the minutes (see E-III, 10). 
8.3.3 Late arrival, non-appearance and failure to connect 
8.3.3.1 General 
If an absent party was not duly summoned, this is noted in the minutes and 
the oral proceedings are closed. A new date must be fixed for further oral 
proceedings. 
If any party who has been duly summoned to oral proceedings does not 
appear as summoned or fails to connect to the oral proceedings by 
videoconference, as the case may be, the oral proceedings may be 
Rule 115(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter III-13 
 
conducted without them, since a party should not be able to delay issuance 
of a decision by failing to appear or connect. 
It is to be noted that if any party appears or connects before the end of the 
oral proceedings, they have the right to be heard. 
If the party appears or connects only after the proceedings have been 
closed, the division may reopen them at its discretion, subject to two 
conditions: 
(a) 
the division has not pronounced a decision under Art. 97(1) or (2) or 
Art. 101(2) or an interlocutory decision under Art. 106(2) maintaining 
the patent in amended form according to Art. 101(3) (see also 
D-VI, 7.2.2) or a decision to reject the request for limitation under 
Rule 95(4). 
(b) 
all parties to the proceedings agree to the reopening. 
If, however, an allowable request for a change of date of oral proceedings 
has been filed (see E-III, 7.1.1), the proceedings are postponed and a new 
date fixed. If the filing of the request was delayed due to the carelessness 
of the party concerned, the proceedings may, depending on the 
circumstances, still be postponed; if this happens in opposition 
proceedings, a decision on the apportionment of costs may have to be 
taken (see D-IX, 1.4). 
8.3.3.2 Procedure in opposition proceedings 
If new facts or evidence are submitted during inter partes oral proceedings 
which a party, although duly summoned, fails to attend, it must first be 
examined whether these submissions may be disregarded (Art. 114(2); see 
also E-VI, 2). 
Following G 4/92, if new facts are taken into consideration, then at the end 
of the oral proceedings a decision based on these facts cannot be taken 
against the absent party. Further, new evidence can only be used against 
the absent party if it has been previously notified and merely supports the 
previous assertions of the party who submits it. However, new arguments 
may be used at any time, in so far as they do not change the grounds on 
which the decision is based. 
In other words, what the Enlarged Board of Appeal ruled out in G 4/92 was 
the possibility of taking decisions against the absent party on the basis of a 
surprising course of events at the oral proceedings, which changes the 
legal and factual framework of the case in an unforeseeable way 
(see T 414/94). 
An absent party cannot be considered taken by surprise if during oral 
proceedings the other side attempts to overcome objections raised before 
the oral proceedings. In particular, a submission during oral proceedings of 
a more restricted and/or formally amended set of claims with a view to 
overcoming the objections of the opponent is not considered a "new fact" 
(see T 133/92 and T 202/92). Nor is it unexpected that amended claims are 
Art. 104(1) 
Part E – Chapter III-14 

 
 
examined for formal admissibility and for compliance with Art. 123(2) and 
(3) (see T 341/92). 
In the particular case of an absent opponent, if new prior art is submitted for 
the first time during oral proceedings which may be an obstacle to the 
maintenance of the opposed patent, this new prior art can be taken into 
consideration despite the opponent's absence because it is in the 
opponent's favour (see T 1049/93). 
8.3.3.3 Procedure in examination proceedings 
Oral proceedings give applicants an opportunity to exercise their rights 
under Art. 113(1). In examination proceedings, when applicants file 
amended claims before oral proceedings which they subsequently do not 
attend, they may expect a decision based on objections which might arise 
against such claims in their absence. A decision can be taken based on 
facts and arguments presented earlier in the proceedings and/or based on 
new arguments which may be expected to be raised. 
In examination proceedings, the annex to the summons to oral proceedings 
must include all the objections that are likely to be discussed during oral 
proceedings and indicate that amended claims in response to the 
communication will have to be examined at the oral proceedings for 
compliance with the EPC. This ensures that the applicant's right to be 
heard (Art. 113(1)) is respected and that the proceedings are not delayed 
unnecessarily if an applicant does not attend oral proceedings. 
Where auxiliary requests are filed before the summons to oral proceedings 
is issued, these requests must be commented on in terms of both 
admissibility and allowability. However, the reasoning given in the 
preliminary opinion is to focus on the main request; only a brief indication of 
the essential reasons for the non-allowability of the subject-matter or the 
non-admissibility of the auxiliary requests is to be provided. It is to be noted 
that this brief indication of the essential reasons for not allowing or not 
admitting the auxiliary requests has to be thorough enough to ensure that 
the applicant has been informed of the objections raised by the examining 
division and has thus been given the opportunity to comment on them 
(see C-V, 1.1 and C-V, 4.7.1.1). 
8.4 Opening of the substantive part of the proceedings 
In so far as necessary, the person conducting the proceedings will outline 
the stage reached in the proceedings and will indicate the most important 
matters in dispute according to the file. In examination or opposition 
proceedings this may also be done by the primary examiner. 
8.5 Submissions by the parties 
After the introduction referred to above, the party or parties will be allowed 
the floor in order to put their cases and to make applications on procedural 
matters and state the grounds thereof. In the normal course of events each 
party will have only one opportunity of making a comprehensive statement. 
In opposition proceedings the opponents will generally speak first and the 
patent proprietor afterwards. Where there are a number of opponents, it 
 

Part E – Chapter III-15 
 
may be expedient to grant the patent proprietor an opportunity of replying 
directly after the statement of each individual opponent. The opponents and 
the patent proprietor will be given the opportunity of making a final reply. 
The submissions of the party or parties may be prepared in writing, 
although they are expected to be made extemporaneously as far as 
possible. Passages from documents already introduced into the 
proceedings which are referred to again may only be read out where their 
precise wording is relevant. 
Submissions by a person who is not qualified under Art. 133 and 134 to 
represent parties to proceedings before the EPO may be admitted at oral 
proceedings when this person accompanies a professional representative 
representing that party. Such submissions, however, cannot be made as a 
matter of right, but only with the permission and at the discretion of the 
examining or opposition division or the Legal Division. In opposition 
proceedings the division will consider in exercising its discretion whether 
(see G 4/95): 
(i) 
the party on behalf of which the person is to speak has filed a 
request to this effect; 
(ii) 
the party making the request has indicated the name of the person, 
the subject-matter of the submission and the person's qualification to 
speak on this matter; 
(iii) 
the request has been filed sufficiently in advance of the oral 
proceedings; 
(iv) 
in the case of a late-filed request, either there are exceptional 
circumstances justifying the admission of the submission or all the 
other parties agree to the making of the submission; and 
(v) 
the submissions are made under the continuing responsibility and 
control of the professional representative. 
If neither of the alternative conditions mentioned under (iv) are met, a 
late-filed request will be refused. The time limit to be applied when deciding 
whether a request was late-filed is that fixed in the summons under 
Rule 116. 
If a party is represented by an authorised employee rather than a 
professional representative, the same considerations apply in respect of a 
person accompanying the authorised employee. As no other party is 
affected, examining divisions can adopt a more liberal approach than 
opposition divisions. 
Parties are not to be considered as accompanying persons in the sense of 
G 4/95 (see T 621/98). They have the right to make submissions in oral 
proceedings by virtue of their status as party to the proceedings. 
Part E – Chapter III-16 

 
 
If written submissions are made during oral proceedings, the division will 
make sure that requirements such as typed-form, signature and dating of 
the 
submissions 
are 
met 
(T 733/99). 
See 
also 
E-III, 8.7 
and 
OJ EPO 2020, A71. 
8.5.1 Use of computer-generated slideshows in oral proceedings 
In oral proceedings a computer-generated slideshow cannot be used as a 
matter of right, but only with the permission of and at the discretion of the 
examining or opposition division or the Legal Division (T 1556/06), and, in 
the case of oral proceedings on the EPO premises, if the necessary 
equipment is available in the room in which the oral proceedings are held. 
Generally, screens are available in most meeting rooms; however, requests 
to provide further equipment such as projectors will be refused. 
Care must be taken that presentations of computer-generated slideshows 
do not negatively impact the efficient conduct of oral proceedings 
(e.g. interruptions for the technical preparations for the presentation). 
Similar considerations apply to the use of other visual aids (e.g. flipcharts, 
pictures, screensharing). 
8.5.1.1 Opposition proceedings (inter partes) 
As a prerequisite, copies of the material to be presented must be provided 
in good time before the oral proceedings, i.e. Rule 116 applies. These 
copies are treated like any other submission made in writing. 
The opposition division will decide whether the presentation of a 
computer-generated slideshow would facilitate the proceedings, after 
having heard the parties and taking into account whether allowing or 
refusing the use of the presentation would be detrimental to any participant. 
A balance must be found between the presenter's interest in defending the 
case in the most appropriate manner and the other party's need to fully 
understand the submissions made and to have a true opportunity to 
respond. 
The presentation of computer-generated slideshows in oral proceedings will 
be allowed if in the absence of this visual aid it would be much more difficult 
to follow the party's submissions. For example, slides showing: 
(a) 
the structure or functioning of a product which is complex, or 
(b) 
complicated reaction schemes, 
(c) 
complex formulae, or 
(d) 
the operation of a complex apparatus 
might be considered by the opposition division to facilitate the discussion. 
If copies of the material to be presented have not been filed in good time, or 
if the slides contain new matter, the presentation may be disregarded under 
Art. 114(2) and Rule 116. In this case the opposition division will apply the 
 

Part E – Chapter III-17 
 
same criteria for admissibility as are used for other late-filed facts or 
evidence (see E-VI, 2). 
8.5.1.2 Examination proceedings (ex parte) 
As no other party is affected, examining divisions may adopt a more liberal 
approach than opposition divisions. Therefore, examining divisions will 
consider allowing the presentation of a computer-generated slideshow even 
if the slides are not communicated in advance of the oral proceedings, 
provided that: 
(a) 
the examining division feels able to deal with this late-filed material 
without 
unduly 
lengthening 
the 
proceedings. 
The 
same 
considerations as for other late-filed facts and evidence apply 
(see E-VI, 2); 
(b) 
the submissions contribute to the resolution of the questions at issue. 
8.5.2 Written submissions during oral proceedings by 
videoconference 
Where oral proceedings are held as a videoconference, documents filed 
subsequently as referred to in Rule 50 must be filed by email 
(OJ EPO 2020, A71, Art. 1(1)). This also applies to authorisations. 
Where filed documents require signature, this signature is preferably 
applied to the attached document. Alternatively, it may appear in the text of 
the accompanying email, which will also be annexed to the minutes. The 
signature must take the form of a string of characters (such as an email 
signature with the sender's name and position) or a facsimile signature. 
The documents are to be sent to the email address indicated during the 
videoconference by the competent department. 
Any emails and attached documents filed by a party during oral 
proceedings with more than one party will be forwarded by the division to 
the other parties present at the proceedings unless the party in question 
has already sent them direct to the email address indicated by the other 
parties. Therefore, each party must communicate to the division and, where 
possible, to the other parties at the beginning of the oral proceedings the 
email address it wishes to use for receiving copies of such documents. 
Parties and representatives must ensure that they can immediately take 
note of any document sent to the email address indicated by them. 
Amended application documents are to be filed as attachments. 
Attachments containing these amended application documents must be in 
PDF format and must comply with the WIPO Standard for Filing and 
Processing in Electronic Form (Annex F of the Administrative Instructions 
under the PCT). Where an attachment containing these amended 
application documents is not in PDF format or does not comply with the 
WIPO Standard or is illegible or incomplete, the party must be promptly 
informed during the videoconference. Where the deficiencies cannot be 
remedied during the videoconference or within the time limit set, that 
OJ EPO 2020, A71, 
Art. 2 
OJ EPO 2020, A71, 
Art. 3 
OJ EPO 2022, A106 
OJ EPO 2020, A71, 
Art. 4 
Part E – Chapter III-18 

 
 
document (or that part of the document which is illegible or incomplete) is 
deemed not to have been received. 
Other attachments may be sent in any format which can be opened by the 
division and which can be reproduced in a legible form. Otherwise they are 
deemed not to have been filed. 
If an attachment is infected with a computer virus or contains other 
malicious software, it will be deemed to be illegible. The EPO is not obliged 
to receive, open or process any such attachment. 
No paper documents need be filed to confirm documents filed by email. 
All submissions made by email during a videoconference must be annexed 
to the minutes unless the exceptions under Rule 144 and the decision of 
the President of the EPO dated 12 July 2007 concerning documents 
excluded from file inspection apply (see A-XI, 2.3 and Special edition No. 3, 
OJ EPO 2007, J.3). A confidentiality note which is routinely included in 
emails is not to be regarded as a request to exclude these submissions 
from the public file. 
If the division consents, a party may present its screen for illustrative 
purposes. An item displayed in that way will not be considered as a 
document submitted by that party. 
8.6 Facts, evidence or amendments introduced at a late stage 
With respect to facts, evidence or amendments not submitted in due time or 
arguments presented at a late stage in the proceedings, including during 
oral proceedings, see E-VI, 2. 
8.7 Handwritten amendments in oral proceedings 
8.7.1 General principles 
The requirement of Art. 2(7) of the decision of the President of the EPO 
dated 25 November 2022 that the description, claims and abstract, as well 
as the request for grant, must be typed or printed in principle extends to 
documents replacing application documents and to amended patent 
specification documents (see also A-III, 3.2). 
Responsibility for formally correct submissions and, in particular, for 
compliance with these requirements lies with the applicant/proprietor. 
Deletions, correction of the numbering of the figures and insertion of 
reference numbers and associated arrows in drawings are considered as 
typewritten amendments. 
If the oral proceedings take place by way of exception on the premises of 
the EPO, the parties may use the EPO's technical facilities that allow for 
compliance with the formal requirements, in particular computers equipped 
with a word processor and a printer, network printers and copiers enabling 
OJ EPO 2020, A71, 
Art. 5 
OJ EPO 2020, A71, 
Art. 6 
OJ EPO 2022, A106 
Rules 50(1) and 86 
Rule 49(2) 
OJ EPO 2022, A113 
 

Part E – Chapter III-19 
 
documents to be printed from a USB stick, and internet access in public 
areas via a public wireless network (see OJ EPO 2013, 603). 
Parties are recommended to prepare electronic copies of documents likely 
to be amended. Published patent applications and specifications are 
available via the European publication server. See D-IV, 5.3 for the 
preferred way to amend the description in opposition proceedings. 
For the procedures in examination and opposition oral proceedings, see 
E-III, 8.7.2 and 8.7.3 respectively. 
8.7.2 Procedure in examination proceedings 
In examination proceedings, the formal requirements prescribed by the 
President under Rule 49(2) apply equally to application documents 
submitted during oral proceedings by email or by hand. 
Documents containing handwritten amendments will normally be accepted 
by the division as a basis for discussion during oral proceedings until 
agreement is reached on the final text of the patent. However, a final 
decision granting a patent may be taken only on the basis of documents 
which are formally compliant.  
If the applicant is unable to provide formally correct amended application 
documents during oral proceedings, the following applies: 
(a) 
If a decision to refuse a patent application is imminent and formally 
non-compliant documents making up the application are on file, to 
avoid prolonging the proceedings the examining division will go 
ahead and issue the decision, based on substantive arguments. It 
may however mention this formal deficiency in the decision. 
(b) 
If there is agreed patentable subject-matter, the examining division 
announces the following: 
– 
the amended application fulfils the requirements of the EPC 
except for certain formal requirements, e.g. the ones regarding 
handwritten amendments; and 
– 
the procedure will be continued in writing. 
After the closure of the oral proceedings, the formalities officer on 
behalf of the examining division (see A-III, 3.2) will invite the 
applicant to file formally correct documents within two months. Where 
the amendments submitted in reply to this invitation differ from the 
patentable subject-matter established at the oral proceedings, the 
procedure described in C-V, 4.7 is to be applied. 
8.7.3 Procedure in opposition proceedings 
Rule 82(2), third sentence, provides for one exception to the principle that a 
decision determining the final text of the patent may be based only on 
formally compliant documents. Pursuant to this provision, in oral opposition 
proceedings, the patent proprietor is by way of exception not required to file 
OJ EPO 2022, A113 
Part E – Chapter III-20 

 
 
documents compliant with the requirements of Art. 2(7) of the decision of 
the President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113) 
prior to the interlocutory decision on the documents on the basis of which 
the patent is to be maintained. The proprietor may choose to submit a 
formally compliant version of the amended text only within the time limit 
under Rule 82(2) (OJ EPO 2016, A22). The parties will nevertheless be 
encouraged 
to 
file 
compliant 
documents 
during 
oral 
opposition 
proceedings.  
In contrast, in written opposition proceedings, an interlocutory decision to 
maintain the patent as amended may be issued only on the basis of 
formally compliant documents since the invitation in Rule 82(2) applies only 
to documents filed during oral proceedings (see H-IV, 5.3). 
If, in oral proceedings, the interlocutory decision of the opposition division 
was based on documents which do not comply with Art. 2(7) of the decision 
of the President of the EPO dated 25 November 2022, i.e. which contain 
handwritten amendments, the opposition division will invite the proprietor in 
the communication under Rule 82(2) to file a formally compliant version of 
the amended text. The invitation will specify the formally deficient amended 
paragraphs and/or claims for which replacement paragraphs and/or claims 
need to be filed. The same applies where a decision of the boards of 
appeal remits the case to the department of first instance with the order to 
maintain the patent on the basis of amended documents with handwritten 
amendments. 
In reply to the invitation of the opposition division under Rule 82(2) the 
proprietor will have to submit replacement paragraphs and/or claims which 
contain a formally compliant verbatim reproduction of the text as 
determined by the interlocutory decision (or the decision of the board of 
appeal). Any divergence between the text matter of the formally deficient 
paragraphs (and/or claims) specified in the invitation under Rule 82(2) and 
the text of the replacement paragraphs (and/or claims) will trigger a 
communication under Rule 82(3). A communication under Rule 82(3) will 
also be sent, if the proprietor does not reply at all or not in time, if the 
replacement paragraphs and/or claims are incomplete or if the replacement 
paragraphs and/or claims are again formally deficient. 
If a formally compliant version of the verbatim text of the specified amended 
paragraphs (and/or claims) is not submitted within two months from the 
notification of the communication under Rule 82(3), the patent will be 
revoked. 
8.8 Use of Rule 137(4) for amendments filed during oral proceedings 
in examination 
A communication under Rule 137(4) will not be sent in respect of 
amendments filed during oral proceedings (see H-III, 2.1.3), since this 
would unduly delay the procedure. Making a request under Rule 137(4) 
during oral proceedings would have the consequence of staying the 
proceedings for one month, while waiting for the applicant's answer. 
 

Part E – Chapter III-21 
 
The examining division therefore requests the applicants to provide a basis 
for any amendments submitted during oral proceedings before any new 
amendments can be admitted into the proceedings. 
In special cases, e.g. where there are many auxiliary requests which are 
difficult to check for compliance with the requirements of Art. 123(2) and the 
requests do not comply with Rule 137(4), the examining division may 
exercise its discretion by not admitting these requests under Rule 137(3) 
rather than raising an objection under Rule 137(4) (see H-II, 2.3 and 
H-III, 3.3.2.1). 
8.9 Discussion of the facts and of the legal position 
A discussion will be conducted with the party or parties concerning those 
technical or legal questions which are relevant to the decision and which, 
after the parties have made their submissions, do not appear to have been 
sufficiently clarified or discussed or are seemingly contradictory. Where 
necessary, it must be ensured that the party or parties file requests which 
are to the point and that the applicant or proprietor formulates the claims 
appropriately. 
If the examining division finds that some patentable subject-matter results 
from an amendment of the claims, it informs the applicant of the fact and 
allows him an opportunity to submit amended claims based thereon. 
If the competent department intends to depart from a previous legal 
assessment of the situation with which the parties are acquainted or from a 
prevailing legal opinion, or if facts or evidence already introduced into the 
proceedings are seen in a different light – e.g. during the deliberations of 
the examining or opposition division (see E-III, 8.11) – so that the case 
takes a significant turn, the parties must be informed thereof. 
8.10 Right of the other members of the division to put questions 
The chair must allow any member of the examining or opposition division 
who so requests to put questions. They may determine at which point in the 
proceedings such questions may be put. 
In oral proceedings, questions may be put to the parties in connection with 
their statements or the discussion of the facts or of the legal position. When 
evidence is taken as part of oral proceedings questions may also be put to 
the witnesses, parties and experts called. As regards the right of the parties 
to put questions, see E-IV, 1.6.7. 
8.11 Closure of oral proceedings 
If the competent department considers that the matter has been sufficiently 
thoroughly discussed, it must decide on the subsequent procedure to be 
followed. Where the department consists of a number of members – as in 
the case of the examining or opposition divisions – they must, if necessary, 
deliberate on the matter in the absence of the parties. Where oral 
proceedings are held by videoconferences and the members connect to the 
oral proceedings from different locations (see E-III, 8.2.2), the members will 
deliberate and vote among themselves via a separate communication 
channel. If new aspects emerge during the discussion and require further 
Part E – Chapter III-22 

 
 
questions to be put to the parties, the proceedings may be restarted. Any 
person conducting the proceedings may thereafter give the decision of the 
department. Otherwise they inform the party or parties of the subsequent 
procedure and then close the oral proceedings. 
While the department is bound by the decision it issues on substantive 
matters (see E-III, 9), it is free, as a result of further reflection, to inform the 
parties that it intends to depart from the procedure which it has announced. 
The subsequent procedure may, for example, consist in the department 
issuing a further communication, imposing certain requirements on one of 
the parties, or informing the parties that it intends to grant or maintain the 
patent in an amended form. As regards the delivery of a decision in the last 
case, see E-III, 9. 
If the patent is to be granted or maintained in an amended form, it is the 
aim to reach an agreement upon the final text in the oral proceedings. If, 
however, by way of exception the examining or opposition division indicates 
during the oral proceedings that it would be willing to grant or maintain a 
European patent provided that certain amendments are made which could 
not reasonably have been foreseen from the earlier procedure, the 
applicant or patent proprietor will be given a time limit of normally two 
to four months in which to submit such amendments. If the applicant or 
patent proprietor fails to do so, the application will be refused or the patent 
will be revoked. 
8.11.1 Requesting postponement during oral proceedings 
Oral proceedings in examination, limitation or opposition are intended to 
bring the proceedings to a close, and parties are expected to prepare 
themselves fully. 
The division will therefore normally refuse any request from a party that the 
proceedings be postponed or continued in writing. 
Even if the description needs to be revised to bring it into conformity with 
amended claims, the applicant or proprietor is expected to make the 
necessary changes either in the oral proceedings or during a break. 
8.11.2 Adjournment of oral proceedings due to lack of time 
If possible, oral proceedings should not last more than eight working hours. 
However, they may be extended slightly if an imminent conclusion seems 
likely. If not, the chair terminates the discussions for that day at an 
appropriate point to allow time for possible arrangement of a new date. 
Continuing oral proceedings on a day other than the one set out in the 
summons requires a new summons with a notice period of at least two 
months according to Rule 115(1) unless all parties agree to a shorter period 
of notice. See E-III, 6 for the general practice adopted for setting the date of 
oral proceedings. The explicit agreement of all parties is necessary and 
must be recorded in the minutes. 
The new summons must indicate the points that still need to be discussed 
during the upcoming oral proceedings (Rule 116(1)). It is at the discretion of 
 

Part E – Chapter III-23 
 
the division whether to indicate the points that are closed or to provide a 
provisional opinion on the points that are still open. A new final date for 
making submissions is not fixed under Rule 116 in the new summons if the 
subject of the proceedings has not changed (see E-VI, 2.2.2). Otherwise, a 
new date is fixed under Rule 116 and at least two months' notice is given 
under Rule 115 unless the parties agree to a shorter period. The minutes of 
the oral proceedings which took place are to be issued in advance of the 
upcoming oral proceedings, preferably no later than when the new 
summons is issued. 
If the agreed date is too close for the parties to be able to receive the new 
summons in time (e.g. the next day or a day in the same week), it is 
necessary that the parties waive their right to receive a new summons. The 
respective statements of the parties must also be recorded in the minutes. 
9. Delivery of the decision 
The delivery of the decision will follow a statement by the person 
conducting the proceedings announcing the operative part of the decision 
(see also E-III, 8.11 and E-X, 2.3). 
The operative part may, for example, read as follows: 
"The patent application ... is refused." or 
"The opposition to the patent ... is rejected." or 
"The patent ... is revoked." or 
"Taking account of the amendments made by the proprietor in the 
opposition proceedings, the patent and the invention to which it relates 
satisfy the requirements of the Convention." or 
"The request for limitation of the patent .... is allowable." or 
"The request for limitation of the patent .... is rejected." or 
"Patent grant proceedings relating to European patent application No. ... 
are interrupted/resumed as from ..." 
Once a decision has been pronounced, submissions of the party or parties 
cannot be considered any longer and the decision stands, subject to the 
correction of errors in accordance with Rule 140. It may only be amended 
by appeal (see E-XII, 1, E-XII, 7 and E-XII, 8). 
No pronouncement need be made at this point as to the reasons for the 
decision or the possibility of appeal. However, the examining or opposition 
division may give a short explanation of the reasons for the decision. 
Subsequently the decision in writing (see E-X) containing the reasoning 
and information as to right of appeal must be notified to the parties without 
undue delay. The period for appeal will only begin to run from the date of 
notification of the written decision. 
Rule 111(1) and (2) 
Part E – Chapter III-24 

 
 
Generally speaking it will not be possible to give a decision granting a 
European patent or maintaining it in amended or limited form in oral 
proceedings since, in the case of the grant of a patent, the requirements 
laid down in Rule 71(3) to (7), and in the case of a patent being maintained 
in amended or limited form, the requirements of Rule 82(1) and (2) or 
Rule 95(3) must be fulfilled. 
The division further ensures that the result of oral proceedings in opposition 
is made available to the public online immediately after the hearing. If the 
patent is maintained on the basis of amendments filed during oral 
proceedings, these amendments are made public as well. 
10. Minutes of oral proceedings 
As regards the minutes of taking of evidence, see E-IV, 1.7. 
10.1 Formal requirements 
Minutes of oral proceedings must be drawn up. 
The person conducting the proceedings must ensure that during the whole 
proceedings an employee is available to keep minutes. If necessary, during 
oral proceedings different employees may carry out the task of 
minute-writing in sequence. In this case it must be made clear in the 
minutes which section was drawn up by which employee. The employees 
are normally members of the competent department, e.g. the examining or 
opposition division. Following the proceedings, the minutes are formatted. 
The minutes must be authenticated by the employee responsible for 
drawing them up and by the employee who conducted the oral 
proceedings, either by signature or by other appropriate means. If 
exceptionally the employee responsible cannot sign the minutes, one of the 
other members of the division may sign them on the employee's behalf 
subject to the conditions defined in E-X, 2.3. They are not signed by the 
parties. The parties must be provided with a copy of the minutes. Copies 
must be notified to them as soon as possible after the oral proceedings. 
Provided the parties have been informed, the EPO may make sound 
recordings of the oral proceedings. However, no person other than an EPO 
employee is allowed to make any recording or retransmit any part of the 
oral proceedings, whether image or sound or both (see OJ EPO 1986, 63, 
OJ EPO 2022, A106). 
Sound recordings are made only in the case of taking of evidence 
(E-IV, 1.7). The recording is kept until the end of any possible proceedings. 
Copies of the recording will not be provided to the parties. 
The minutes must first include the date of the proceedings, the names of 
the members of the department, e.g. the opposition division, present and 
the name or names of the minute-writer or writers. Minutes must also 
include the details referred to in E-III, 10.3. 
Rule 124(1) 
Rule 124(3) and (4) 
 

Part E – Chapter III-25 
 
10.2 Language 
The minutes are normally written in the language of the proceedings under 
Art. 14(3), i.e. the EPO official language in which the application was filed 
or into which it was translated. The exceptions are set out in Rule 4(6). 
Amendments to the text of the description or claims of the application or 
patent must be recorded in the minutes in the language of the proceedings 
under Art. 14(3). 
Where the exact wording is important, or if the parties so insist, the minutes 
must record the following, word for word, in the EPO official language 
actually used or into which the statements were translated, as provided for 
in Rule 4(6): 
(a) 
requests of the parties 
(b) 
legally relevant statements by parties, witnesses, experts and 
division members, and 
(c) 
order of the decision. 
The term "statement" within the meaning of Rule 4(6) is to be interpreted 
narrowly as the exception to the rule of using the language of proceedings 
in the written procedure rather than as allowing the recording of all 
arguments made in another official language during the oral proceedings.  
For derogations from the language of proceedings see E-V, 6. 
See E-III, 10.3 for requests for recording specific statements in the minutes. 
10.3 Subject-matter of minutes 
Minutes have an important function as evidence of respect for the right to 
be heard (Art. 113(1)). They must contain the essentials of the oral 
proceedings and the relevant statements made by the parties, together with 
arguments relevant to the decision and not contained in the parties' written 
submissions. Details of the arguments raised by the parties, however, are 
developed in the decision, and therefore are only briefly reported in the 
minutes. 
Relevant statements are, for example, new or amended procedural 
submissions or the withdrawal thereof, the fresh submission or amendment 
or withdrawal of application documents, such as claims, description and 
drawings, and statements of surrender. 
The essentials of the oral proceedings include new statements by the party 
or parties and by the member or members of the department concerning 
the subject-matter of the proceedings. In examination and opposition 
proceedings, the essentials are principally new statements arguing the 
presence or lack of novelty, inventive step and other patentability criteria. 
The minutes are not, however, expected to be an exhaustive recollection of 
everything that was said during the oral proceedings. Rather, they are 
limited to the essentials and are as brief and concise as possible. 
Art. 113(1) 
Rule 124(1) 
Part E – Chapter III-26 

 
 
Vague or general statements are to be avoided. Also, care must be taken 
to ensure that statements crucial to the decision are correctly recorded. 
Although this is normally not necessary, in case of doubt the record of such 
statements is read out to the parties concerned before the decision is taken 
and announced. 
Requests from parties for recording specific statements are accepted if the 
statements form part of the essentials of the oral proceedings and are 
relevant for reaching the decision. Otherwise, they may be refused since 
recording statements that a party considers might be useful in subsequent 
proceedings is not the function of the minutes. See E-III, 10.2 for the 
language requirements. 
If new facts or evidence are submitted during the oral proceedings, the 
minutes must make clear that the division has examined them under 
Art. 114(1). They must also indicate whether or not the division, after 
having heard the parties, subsequently disregarded them under Art. 114(2). 
The minutes briefly summarise the following elements, where present: 
(a) 
arguments relevant for the decision as submitted by the parties, 
which, if they are already known from the written procedure, can be 
referred to as such, 
(b) 
the substance of any new requests by the parties, preferably in the 
form of a brief statement referring to documents containing these 
requests, which must be attached to the minutes, and 
(c) 
objections, arguments and/or requests to the parties voiced by a 
member of the division, focusing on the points relevant for the 
decision which are developed in the grounds for the decision. 
The minutes conclude by indicating the decision taken by the division or, if 
no final decision is taken, the outcome of the proceedings. This part is 
preceded by a record of the parties' final requests as indicated in point (b) 
above. 
The minutes must also contain procedural information, such as how the 
proceedings are to be continued after closure of the oral proceedings or 
whether the public was excluded for the whole or part of the oral 
proceedings. 
The structure of the minutes mirrors the course of oral proceedings (see 
E-III, 8 and sub-points). 
If a decision is given (see E-III, 9), it must be reproduced in the minutes. 
The minutes with the result reached during the proceedings are 
communicated to the parties as soon as possible. 
 

Part E – Chapter III-27 
 
10.4 Request for correction of minutes 
If a party to oral proceedings considers the minutes thereof not to fulfil the 
requirements of Rule 124, it may file a request to that effect, with a 
proposed correction, as soon as possible after receipt of the minutes in 
question. 
The examining/opposition division is competent to decide upon the request 
(T 1198/97, T 68/02 and T 231/99). In response to a request for correction 
the division will either issue corrected minutes of the oral proceedings or 
despatch a communication stating that the minutes already contain the 
essentials of the oral proceedings and the relevant statements of the 
parties and give reasoning thereto (see T 819/96). The communication from 
the division cannot on its own be subject to an appeal. If the request for 
correction is filed within the period for filing the grounds for appeal, the 
division will make every effort to deal with it promptly to the extent possible 
so that the party can refer to the communication in the appeal. 
It is at the discretion of the writer of the minutes (and of the chair who 
authenticates them) to decide what is considered essential and relevant in 
the meaning of Rule 124(1) (T 212/97). The minutes are corrected when 
they show deficiencies with regard to the aspects mentioned, for example if 
essential submissions or similarly important procedural statements are 
missing, or if they are incorrectly reflected in the minutes (T 231/99, 
T 642/97 and T 819/96). 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-1 
 
Chapter IV – Taking and conservation of 
evidence 
1. Taking of evidence by the departments of the EPO 
1.1 General remarks 
Formal taking of evidence in accordance with Rule 117 will occur mainly in 
opposition proceedings and hardly ever before the examining division. The 
following sections of this chapter are therefore based primarily on 
opposition proceedings. However, they also apply mutatis mutandis to 
other proceedings and particularly to substantive examination. 
1.2 Means of evidence 
The party or parties may at any time during proceedings submit evidence in 
support of alleged facts (see E-III, 5, E-X, 1.2, D-IV, 5.3, D-IV, 5.4 and 
D-VI, 3). This must be done at the earliest opportunity. When such 
evidence is such as could have been put forward at an earlier stage it is for 
the competent department to consider whether it is expedient (see E-VI, 2) 
to allow the new evidence to be introduced. 
It is generally desirable for parties to produce evidence in respect of all the 
facts alleged in support of their case, in order, for example, to show 
whether a particular technique was generally known to industry or whether 
there was any prejudice against a particular technique. 
Facts adduced by a party will, however, normally be deemed true, even 
without supporting evidence, if it is clear that no doubts exist concerning 
them, if they do not contradict one another or if no objection is raised. In 
such cases the facts need not be supported by evidence. 
There will however be occasions, particularly in opposition proceedings, in 
which the arguments of the party or parties must be supported by evidence. 
This will for example be the case where reference is made to prior art, for 
instance in the form of an oral description, a use or perhaps a company 
publication and there is some doubt as to whether, and if so when, such 
prior art was made available to the public. 
The means of evidence which are admissible in proceedings before the 
EPO are (non-exhaustively) listed in Art. 117(1): 
– 
production of documents; 
– 
hearing the parties; 
– 
hearing witnesses; 
– 
sworn statements in writing; 
– 
requests for information, for instance from a publisher concerning the 
date of publication of a book 
Art. 117 
Rule 117 
Art. 117(1) 
Part E – Chapter IV-2 

 
 
– 
opinions by experts (see E-IV, 1.8.1); and 
– 
inspection. 
The most appropriate way of obtaining evidence in the individual case 
depends on the facts which have to be proven and on the availability of the 
evidence. To prove prior use in an opposition, the opponents usually offer 
as evidence the production of documents, the hearing of witnesses or 
parties, or they present sworn statements in writing. It is at the opposition 
division's discretion to evaluate this evidence, there being no fixed rules as 
to how any category of evidence is to be judged (for the evaluation of 
evidence, see E-IV, 4). 
If the documents produced (e.g. patent documents) leave no doubt as to 
their contents and date of availability to the public and are more relevant for 
the patent in suit than other evidence offered, reasons of procedural 
efficiency may lead the opposition division to not pursue the other evidence 
at first. 
If the testimony of a witness is offered, the opposition division may decide 
to hear this person in order to verify the facts for which this witness is 
brought forward, e.g. the prior use of the claimed product in an undertaking 
or the existence of an obligation to secrecy. For adequate substantiation 
the notice of opposition must make clear these facts, as witnesses are 
meant to serve for corroboration of facts brought forward, not for supplying 
these facts in place of the opponent. The above applies likewise to hearing 
the parties (see also E-IV, 1.6). 
The "sworn statements in writing" referred to in Art. 117(1)(g) are unknown 
in some national legal systems, which instead have their own instruments 
(see T 558/95). 
Whether a written statement ("affidavit") is made under oath or not is only 
one of the criteria applied by the opposition division in its evaluation of the 
evidence adduced. Apart from its relevance for the case, other criteria are 
the relationship between the person making the statement and the parties 
to the proceedings, the personal interest of that person, the context in 
which the statement was made, etc. Such a statement does not go beyond 
its literal content and does not allow the opposition division to assess the 
associated or background factors. If the alleged facts are contested by the 
other party, the opposition division does not generally base its decision on 
such a statement, but summons the person making the statement as a 
witness, if so offered by the party. The ensuing hearing of the witness 
allows the opposition division and the parties to put questions to the 
witness and thus enables the opposition division to establish the facts on 
the basis of that person's testimony. If that person is not offered as a 
witness, the opposition division will not pursue this evidence further. 
Inspection will enable direct observations to be made and direct 
impressions to be formed of the object or process concerned. It may, for 
example, involve the demonstration of a product or process requested by 
the applicant or proprietor of the patent to substantiate the method of 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-3 
 
operation of the subject-matter of the patent where this is disputed by the 
examining or opposition division. 
Evidence in the form of documents normally stays on the file. Only 
exceptionally and on reasoned request can documents filed as evidence be 
returned unconsidered, e.g. if they were third-party statements filed in 
breach of a confidentiality agreement and the other parties agree to the 
request (see T 760/89). 
1.3 Taking of evidence 
The department responsible for the taking of evidence in the form of a 
hearing of witnesses, parties and experts will, in substantive examination 
and opposition proceedings, be the division before which the taking of 
evidence as part of oral proceedings would normally take place. If evidence 
is to be taken, the examining or opposition division will normally have been 
enlarged to include a legally qualified member. The division may 
commission one of its members to examine the evidence adduced. 
Generally, this will be the primary examiner under Art. 18(2) or 19(2). 
A member may, for example, be commissioned pursuant to Rule 119(1), for 
the purposes of an inspection, such as in the form of a demonstration of a 
process or the investigation of an object, particularly in undertakings 
located far away. 
A member may also be commissioned to attend a court hearing pursuant to 
Rule 120(3), and put questions to the witnesses, parties and experts. 
The language for taking evidence and writing the minutes is governed by 
Art. 14(3) (language of the proceedings) and Rule 4 (derogations from the 
provisions concerning the language of the proceedings in oral 
proceedings); see also E-III, 10.2 and E-V. 
Evidence can be taken on the premises of the EPO or by videoconference. 
For details regarding the taking of evidence by videoconference see 
OJ EPO 2020, A135. 
1.4 Order to take evidence 
Where the competent department of the EPO considers it necessary to 
hear the oral evidence of parties, witnesses or experts or to carry out an 
inspection, it must make a decision to this end (order to take evidence), 
setting out the investigation which it intends to carry out, relevant facts to 
be proved, the date, time and place of the investigation and whether it will 
be conducted by videoconference. If oral evidence of witnesses and 
experts is requested by a party but the witnesses and experts are not 
simultaneously named, the party is requested, either prior to the issue of 
the order to take evidence or in the order itself, to make known within a 
specified time limit the names and addresses of the witnesses and experts 
whom it wishes to be heard. The time limit to be computed in accordance 
with Rule 132(2) will be not less than two months and not more than 
four months, since any party concerned will normally know beforehand 
whom they wish to be heard as a witness or expert. 
Art. 117(2) 
Rules 118 to 120 
Rule 117 
Part E – Chapter IV-4 

 
 
The order to take evidence must be notified to the parties. It may be 
appealed only together with the final decision unless it allows separate 
appeal (see E-X, 3). 
1.5 Summoning of parties, witnesses and experts 
The parties, witnesses and experts to be heard must be invited to appear to 
give evidence on the date fixed. The summons must be notified. At least 
two months' notice of a summons issued to a party, witness or expert to 
give evidence must be given unless they agree to a shorter period. The 
summons must contain: 
(i) 
an extract from the order to take evidence, indicating in particular the 
date, time and place of the investigation ordered, whether it will be 
conducted by videoconference and stating the facts regarding which 
parties, witnesses and experts are to be heard; 
(ii) 
the names of the parties to the proceedings and particulars of the 
rights which the witnesses or experts may invoke (see E-IV, 1.10);  
(iii) 
an indication that a party, witness or expert who has been 
summoned to appear before the European Patent Office on its 
premises may, at their request, be heard by videoconference; and 
(iv) 
an indication that any party, witness or expert may request to be 
heard by the competent court of their country of residence and a 
requirement that they inform the EPO within a time limit to be fixed by 
the EPO whether they are prepared to appear before it 
(see E-IV, 3.2.2 (iii) and (iv)). 
Even if evidence is not taken in oral proceedings, all parties to the 
proceedings may attend an investigation. Parties not summoned are 
informed thereof within the period laid down in Rule 118(2), together with a 
statement that they may attend. 
1.6 Hearing of parties, witnesses and experts 
1.6.1 General remarks 
Where the examining or opposition division holds hearings for the purpose 
of taking evidence (see E-IV, 1.3) or if the case in question is expected to 
give rise to particular legal issues, it is advisable that the division be 
enlarged by the addition of a legally qualified examiner, if this is not already 
the case (see D-II, 2.2). 
The evidence of witnesses is normally taken at oral proceedings either on 
the premises of the EPO or by videoconference. A party, witness or expert 
can even be heard by videoconference if the oral proceedings are 
otherwise conducted on the premises of the EPO. For details see OJ EPO 
2020, A135. 
The hearing will be either public or non-public, depending on the oral 
proceedings themselves (Art. 116(3) and (4)). 
Art. 119 
Art. 119 
Rule 118(1) and (2) 
Rule 118(2)(a) 
Rule 118(2)(b) 
Rule 118(2)(c) 
Rule 118(2)(d) 
Rule 119(3) 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-5 
 
Where a hearing is held in connection with oral proceedings, the 
considerations set out in E-III, 8.2, E-III, 8.3, E-III, 8.9 and E-III, 8.10 are 
directly applicable, and where this is not the case they apply mutatis 
mutandis. 
The hearing of an "expert" in the sense of Rule 117 requires as a 
precondition a decision to take evidence (see E-IV, 1.4). This is different 
from hearing oral submissions by a person accompanying the 
representative during oral proceedings, which can be allowed at the 
discretion of the division (see G 4/95 and E-III, 8.5). 
1.6.2 Witnesses and experts not summoned 
After opening the proceedings for the taking of evidence, the official in 
charge of the taking of evidence, i.e. in substantive examination and 
opposition proceedings the chair of the division concerned or the member 
commissioned for the taking of evidence, will determine whether any party 
requests that any other person present but not summoned is heard. If any 
party makes such a request they must briefly state why and to what 
purpose the person concerned should give testimony. The department in 
question will then decide on whether or not to grant the request (for the 
admission of facts or evidence not filed in due time see E-VI, 2). 
1.6.3 Guidance to persons heard 
Before any party, witness or expert may be heard, they must be informed 
that the EPO may request the competent court in the country of residence 
of the person concerned to re-examine their evidence on oath or in an 
equally binding form. 
1.6.4 Separate hearings 
Normally each witness must be heard separately, i.e. any other witnesses 
to be heard subsequently must not be present. This Rule does not apply to 
experts and to the parties. Witnesses whose statements conflict may be 
confronted with one another, i.e. each heard in turn in the presence of the 
other. The same applies to experts. 
1.6.5 Examination as to personal particulars 
The hearing will begin by the persons giving evidence being asked their 
given names, family name, age, occupation and address. Witnesses and 
experts must also be asked whether they are related by blood or marriage 
with any of the parties and whether they have a material interest in a 
particular party being successful in the proceedings. 
1.6.6 Examination as to res gestae 
The examination as to personal particulars will be followed by the 
examination as to res gestae. Any person testifying is to be instructed to 
give a full and logical account of what they know concerning the 
subject-matter of the hearing. Further questions may have to be put to 
clarify and supplement statements and to establish on what the knowledge 
of the person testifying is based. Such questions may be put by the 
member commissioned for the taking of evidence, where applicable, the 
chair or any other member of the department concerned. As regards the 
entitlement of other members of the division to put questions, 
Rule 119(2) 
Part E – Chapter IV-6 

 
 
see E-III, 8.10. When formulating questions the same considerations apply 
as for the parties (see E-IV, 1.6.7). 
1.6.7 Entitlement of parties to put questions at hearings 
The parties may put relevant questions to the testifying parties, witnesses 
and experts including, e.g. in opposition proceedings, witnesses and 
experts testifying on behalf of other parties. The official in charge of the 
taking of evidence will determine at what point in the proceedings such 
questions may be put. 
Any doubts on the part of the competent department, e.g. the opposition 
division, or a party as to the admissibility of a question must be settled by 
the competent department. "Leading questions", i.e. questions which 
already contain the statement which one would like to hear from the 
witness, practically only requiring him to answer by "yes" or "no", must be 
avoided, because they do not allow to properly establish the witness' own 
recollection of the facts. Questions may further not be directed to facts 
which require no further discussion, which are in no way relevant to the 
subject-matter for which the taking of evidence has been ordered, or if they 
aim at establishing facts in respect of which no evidence has been offered. 
A decision to reject a question cannot be challenged. As regards the 
entitlement of other members of the division to put questions, 
see E-III, 8.10. 
1.6.8 Hearing of a witness no longer necessary 
The testimony of a witness summoned to oral proceedings is heard if the 
facts which the testimony is supposed to corroborate are relevant to the 
decision (see E-IV, 1.2). Therefore, the witness is not heard if the facts to 
be proved are no longer relevant due to developments before or during oral 
proceedings before the witness is heard. This may be the case for example 
if the public availability of the relevant prior art has been proven by another 
means of evidence or if the patent is to be revoked on another ground for 
opposition and the patent proprietor submits no admissible auxiliary 
requests for the assessment of which the testimony would be relevant. 
1.7 Minutes of taking of evidence 
Minutes of the taking of evidence must be drawn up as described in 
E-III, 10, subject to the following qualifications: 
The minutes of the taking of evidence must, in addition to the essentials of 
the taking of evidence, also record as comprehensively as possible (almost 
verbatim as far as the essential points are concerned) the testimony of the 
parties, witnesses or experts. 
The minutes will normally be taken down by a member of the competent 
department carrying out the taking of evidence. The most efficient way of 
noting testimony is by way of dictation on to a dictating machine, in the 
process of which the person hearing the evidence will summarise the 
testimony in small sections, taking into account any objections raised by the 
persons being heard, and dictate it in this form on to a dictating machine. If 
the dictated passage does not correspond in full to their testimony, the 
persons being heard must raise any objections immediately. This is pointed 
Rule 119(3) 
Rule 124(1) 
Rule 124(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-7 
 
out to them at the beginning of their testimony. At the end of their 
testimony, they will be asked to approve the dictated minutes, which they 
will have listened to as they were dictated. Their approval or any objections 
are to be included in the dictated text. The dictated minutes are typed out 
and the parties are provided with a copy as soon as possible. It is not 
necessary to play back the minutes or to obtain approval of them if the 
testimony has been recorded verbatim and directly, using technical means. 
Where the taking of evidence includes an inspection, the minutes must 
record, in addition to the essentials of the proceedings, the results of the 
inspection. 
In addition, the taking of evidence as well as oral proceedings 
(see E-III, 10.1) may be recorded on sound recording apparatus. 
1.8 Commissioning of experts 
1.8.1 Decision on the form of the opinion 
If the competent department decides of its own motion to obtain an expert 
opinion (D-VI, 1, sixth paragraph), it will have to decide in what form it is 
submitted by the expert whom it appoints. The opinion is drawn up in 
written form only in cases where the competent department considers that 
this form is adequate in view of the content of the opinion and provided that 
the parties agree to this arrangement. As a rule, in addition to submitting a 
written opinion and introducing it orally, the expert will also be heard 
(see E-IV, 1.6). 
A copy of the opinion must be submitted to the parties. The copy will be 
produced by the EPO. 
1.8.2 Objection to an expert 
The parties may object to an expert. Therefore, before commissioning an 
expert to make an opinion, the competent department informs the parties of 
the expert whom it intends to ask to draw up an opinion and of the 
subject-matter of the opinion. The communication to the parties states a 
time limit within which objections to the expert may be made. If the parties 
do object to an expert, the competent department will decide on the 
objection. 
1.8.3 Terms of reference of the expert 
The terms of reference of any expert must include: a precise description of 
their task, the period laid down for the submission of their opinion, the 
names of the parties to the proceedings and particulars of the rights which 
they may invoke under the provisions of Rule 122(2) to (4) (regarding travel 
and subsistence expenses and fees, see E-IV, 1.10). 
1.9 Costs arising from oral proceedings or taking of evidence 
As a rule, the parties to proceedings before the EPO meet the costs they 
have incurred. This principle notwithstanding, the competent body in the 
opposition proceedings may for reasons of equity (see D-IX, 1.4) decide to 
apportion in some other way the costs arising for the parties in respect of 
oral proceedings or taking of evidence (see D-IX, 1) and the costs arising 
Rule 121(1) 
Rule 121(3) 
Rule 121(4) 
Rule 121(2)(a)- 
(d) 
Art. 104(1) and (2) 
Rule 122(1) and (2) 
Part E – Chapter IV-8 

 
 
for the EPO in respect of witnesses and experts (see E-IV, 1.10). The 
competent body may make the taking of evidence conditional upon deposit 
with the EPO by the party who requested the evidence to be taken of a sum 
the amount of which is to be fixed by reference to an estimate of the costs. 
This procedure is applied where at the request of a party to grant or 
opposition proceedings evidence is to be taken by hearing witnesses or 
seeking an expert opinion unless no costs will arise because the witnesses 
or experts have waived their right to indemnification. If the party requesting 
evidence to be taken does not comply with the requirement of making such 
a deposit, the evidence need not be taken. In opposition proceedings the 
party requesting the evidence bears the costs of indemnifying witnesses or 
experts unless for reasons of equity in individual cases other arrangements 
are made for the apportionment of costs under Art. 104(1) in conjunction 
with Rule 88. Any shortfall between the deposit lodged and the amounts 
payable by the EPO under Rule 122(4), second sentence, is fixed by the 
EPO of its own motion. Any unused amount of the deposit lodged is 
refunded. The EPO's internal costs arising through oral proceedings or 
taking of evidence, e.g. any associated staff travel and subsistence costs, 
are to be met by the EPO itself. 
1.10 Entitlements of witnesses and experts 
1.10.1 Expenses for travel and subsistence 
Witnesses and experts who are summoned by and appear before the EPO 
are entitled to appropriate reimbursement, by the EPO, of expenses for 
travel and subsistence (see E-IV, 1.10.3). This applies equally to witnesses 
and experts who are summoned by and appear before the EPO in the 
course of oral proceedings held by videoconference for travel to the place 
where they make themselves available to appear before the EPO by 
videoconference (e.g. a videoconference facility provided by one of the 
parties or a venue with a sufficiently stable internet connection). 
This applies even if the witnesses or experts are not heard, e.g. where 
evidence is to be produced concerning an alleged prior use and shortly 
before the taking of evidence such prior use is substantiated by a document 
already published. Witnesses and experts may be granted an advance on 
their expenses for travel and subsistence. Witnesses and experts who 
appear before the EPO without being summoned by it but are heard as 
witnesses or experts will also be entitled to appropriate reimbursement of 
expenses for travel and subsistence. 
1.10.2 Loss of earnings, fees 
Witnesses entitled to reimbursement of travel and subsistence expenses 
are also entitled to appropriate compensation, by the EPO, for loss of 
earnings, 
and 
experts 
to 
fees 
from 
the 
EPO 
for 
their 
work 
(see E-IV, 1.10.3). These payments must be made to the witnesses and 
experts after they have fulfilled their duties or tasks. 
1.10.3 Details of the entitlements of witnesses and experts 
For the details governing the entitlements of witnesses and experts set out 
under E-IV, 1.10.1 and E-IV, 1.10.2, see OJ EPO 1983, 100. Payment of 
amounts due must be made by the EPO. 
Rule 122(2) 
Rule 122(3) 
Rule 122(4) 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-9 
 
1.11 Models 
1.11.1 When may models be submitted? 
The EPC makes no express provision for the submission of models, but 
there is nothing to stop a party from submitting one himself. Models are not 
part of the application or patent, and therefore cannot be used to disclose 
the invention (Art. 83). 
Models may be useful in EPO proceedings if they serve to substantiate the 
patentability of an invention, e.g. by showing that a given device actually 
works or does so particularly advantageously. Models may also be filed, 
e.g. in opposition proceedings, to illustrate the state of the art, especially 
prior use under Art. 54(2). Models as items for inspection therefore 
constitute evidence under Art. 117(1)(f). 
1.11.2 Procedure 
It is for the competent division to decide whether to take evidence by way of 
inspection of a model. If it considers this to be necessary, it must take a 
decision in the form of an order to take evidence (see E-IV, 1.4), setting out 
the relevant facts to be proved as well as the date, time and place of the 
inspection. 
Where possible, the inspection is to be carried out on the premises of the 
EPO. However, if in view of the characteristics of the model (e.g. form, size, 
material) or due to security constraints an inspection cannot be carried out 
on EPO premises (see also the notice from the EPO dated 
20 December 2016, OJ EPO 2017, A6), the model may be inspected at a 
different location. In particular if such undertakings are located far away, 
the division may commission one of its members to carry out the inspection 
on its behalf (see E-IV, 1.3). 
In general, any object which can be made available for inspection on the 
premises of the EPO can also be inspected during oral proceedings by 
videoconference unless such inspection would result in a disadvantage for 
a party where, e.g. the haptic feel, texture or handling experience of the 
object is of relevance. 
In accordance with Rule 124(1), minutes must be taken, including the 
essential aspects and the result of the inspection. 
1.11.3 Keeping the model 
Even if the division does inspect the model, the EPO is not obliged to keep 
it. It is for the division to decide whether a model is to be kept by the EPO. 
However, as a general rule, models which would require special 
precautions or security measures if kept in the EPO are returned to the 
party. 
The formalities officer is responsible for implementing the decision to keep 
or return the model. If the model is to be kept, the formalities officer notes 
this on a label on the file. If it is to be returned, the formalities officer 
informs the submitter that the model should be preserved in view of 
Part E – Chapter IV-10 

 
 
possible opposition or appeal proceedings and notes the date of return on 
the label. 
1.12 Video recordings 
A party to the proceedings may request that a video recording be shown at 
the oral proceedings. Such a request must include the recording as such as 
well as specifying the type of equipment needed. 
If video recordings are submitted, the division decides whether showing 
them will assist the proceedings. Video data carriers are always kept if the 
division has looked at them. 
2. 
Conservation of evidence 
2.1 Requirements 
On request, the EPO may, without delay, hear oral evidence or conduct 
inspections, with a view to conserving evidence of facts liable to affect a 
decision, where there is reason to fear that it might subsequently become 
more difficult or even impossible to take evidence. This could for example 
be the case where an important witness is about to emigrate to a distant 
country or where perishable matter, e.g. a food-stuff, is adduced as 
involving a use made accessible to the public. 
2.2 Request for the conservation of evidence 
The request for the conservation of evidence must contain: 
(i) 
the name, address and nationality of the persons filing the request 
and the state in which their residence or principal place of business is 
located, in accordance with the provisions of Rule 41(2)(c); 
(ii) 
sufficient identification of the European patent application or 
European patent in question; 
(iii) 
the designation of the facts in respect of which evidence is to be 
taken; 
(iv) 
particulars of the way in which evidence is to be taken; and 
(v) 
a statement establishing a prima facie case for fearing that it might 
subsequently become more difficult or impossible to take evidence. 
The request is not deemed to have been filed until the fee for conservation 
of evidence has been paid. 
2.3 Competence 
The decision on the request and any resulting taking of evidence are 
incumbent upon the department of the EPO required to take the decision 
liable to be affected by the facts to be established. 
Rule 123(1) 
Rule 123(2) 
Rule 123(2)(a) 
Rule 123(2)(b) 
Rule 123(2)(c) 
Rule 123(2)(d) 
Rule 123(2)(e) 
Rule 123(3) 
Rule 123(4) 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-11 
 
Responsibility for the decision and the taking of evidence will therefore 
normally rest with: 
(i) 
the examining division, from the date of filing until the date of the 
decision on the granting of the patent; 
(ii) 
the opposition division, from the latter date until expiry of the time 
allowed for filing notice of opposition and during opposition 
proceedings; and 
(iii) 
the board of appeal, from the date of a final decision by the 
opposition division until it becomes legally binding or while appeal 
proceedings are pending. 
2.4 Decision on the request and the taking of evidence 
The competent department must decide upon the request without delay. If it 
grants the request, it must also immediately make a decision on the taking 
of evidence. 
The provisions with regard to the taking of evidence in proceedings before 
the EPO are applicable. 
The date on which the measures are to be taken must therefore be 
communicated to the applicant for or proprietor of the patent and the other 
parties in sufficient time to allow them to attend. They may ask relevant 
questions. 
3. Taking of evidence by courts or authorities of the contracting 
states 
3.1 Legal co-operation 
Upon receipt of letters rogatory from the EPO, the courts or other 
competent authorities of contracting states will undertake, on behalf of the 
EPO and within the limits of their jurisdiction, any necessary enquiries. 
3.2 Means of giving or taking evidence 
3.2.1 Taking of evidence on oath 
The principal case where evidence is taken by a competent court will be the 
hearing of parties, witnesses or experts. In such instances the competent 
department may request the competent court to take the evidence on oath 
or in an equally binding form. 
3.2.2 Evidence taken by a competent court 
The competent department will, if necessary, request a competent court to 
take evidence, where appropriate under oath, where: 
(i) 
the 
taking 
of 
evidence 
by 
that 
department 
would 
entail 
disproportionately high travelling costs or the taking of evidence by 
the competent court appears to be appropriate on other grounds; 
Rule 123(1) 
Rule 117 
Rule 123(4) 
Rule 123(1) 
Rule 118(2) 
Rule 119(3) 
Art. 131(2) 
Rule 120(3) 
Rule 120(3) 
Part E – Chapter IV-12 

 
 
(ii) 
the competent department considers it advisable for the evidence of 
a party, witness or expert it has heard to be re-examined under oath 
or in an equally binding form (see E-IV, 3.2.1); 
(iii) 
there has been no reply to the summons by the expiry of a period 
fixed 
by 
the 
competent 
department 
in 
the 
summons 
(see E-IV, 1.5(iii)); or 
(iv) 
any party, witness or expert who has been summoned before that 
department requests the latter in accordance with E-IV, 1.5(iii) to 
allow their evidence to be heard by a competent court in their country 
of residence. If the party, witness or expert simply refuses to be 
heard by the responsible division, they are notified that the 
competent national court will have the relevant national legal 
possibilities to oblige them to appear and to testify. 
3.3 Letters rogatory 
The EPO must draw up letters rogatory in the language of the competent 
authority or must attach to such letters rogatory a translation into the 
language of that authority. 
Letters rogatory must be addressed to the central authority designated by 
the contracting state. 
3.4 Procedures before the competent authority 
The EPO must be informed of the time when, and the place where, the 
enquiry is to take place and must inform the parties, witnesses and experts 
concerned. 
If so requested by the EPO, the competent authority shall permit the 
attendance of members of the department concerned and allow them to 
question any person giving evidence either directly or through the 
competent authority. Whether the parties may put questions or not will 
depend on the laws of the contracting states concerned. 
3.5 Costs of taking evidence 
The execution of letters rogatory does not give rise to any reimbursement 
of fees or costs of any nature. Nevertheless, the state in which letters 
rogatory are executed has the right to require the European Patent 
Organisation to reimburse any fees paid to experts and interpreters and the 
costs incurred as a result of the attendance of members of the competent 
department when evidence is taken. 
3.6 Taking of evidence by an appointed person 
If the law applied by the competent authority obliges the parties to secure 
evidence and the authority is not able itself to execute the letters rogatory, 
that authority may, with the consent of the competent department, appoint a 
suitable person to do so. When seeking the consent of the department 
concerned, the competent authority must indicate the approximate costs 
which would result from this procedure. If the competent department gives 
its consent, the European Patent Organisation must reimburse any costs 
incurred; without such consent, the Organisation is not liable for such costs. 
Rule 120(2) 
Rule 120(1) 
Rule 120(1) 
Rule 150(3) 
Rule 150(2) 
Rule 150(1) 
Rule 150(5) 
Rule 120(3) 
Rule 150(6) 
Rule 150(7) 
Rule 150(8) 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-13 
 
4. Evaluation of evidence 
4.1 General remarks 
The competent department has the power and the duty to assess whether 
the alleged facts are sufficiently established based on evidence. The 
proceedings under the EPC are governed by the principle of free evaluation 
of evidence. This principle allows, and requires, a competent department to 
decide according to its own discretion and conviction, by taking into 
account the entire content of the parties' submissions. There are no firm 
rules according to which certain types of evidence are, or are not, 
convincing. This does not mean that the evaluation of evidence may be 
arbitrary, rather the evidence must be assessed comprehensively and 
dutifully. The only decisive factor is whether the department is convinced of 
the truth of the factual allegation, i.e. how credible the department classifies 
a piece of evidence. To do this, the department must put all the arguments 
for and against a factual statement in relation to the required standard of 
proof. In doing so, the department remains bound by the laws of the logic 
and by probability based on experience. The department sets out in the 
decision the reasons for reaching its conclusions (G 2/21). 
The principle of free evaluation of evidence may not be used to simply 
disregard an admissibly submitted piece of evidence that is relied upon by 
a party in support of an inference that is challenged and is decisive for the 
final decision, for example to prove the presence of a technical effect. 
Disregarding it as a matter of principle would deprive the party of a basic 
legal procedural right enshrined in Art. 113(1) and 117(1). For example, the 
mere fact that evidence is post-published is not a sufficient reason not to 
take it into account. 
The state of the art to be taken into consideration in individual cases for the 
purposes of Art. 54 is that laid down in G-IV, 1 to 5 and 7 and G-V. 
The competent department is not obliged to take into consideration any 
facts or evidence not presented by the parties in due time, except within the 
limits specified in E-VI, 2. 
4.2 Types of evidence 
When evaluating submissions made, the difference between facts, 
evidence and arguments must be observed. 
Example: 
The opponent asserts that the preamble to claim 1 is described in 
document A, the characterising portion in document B (facts). To prove this, 
documents are submitted (evidence). The opponent then contends that the 
method claimed does not involve an inventive step, because the skilled 
person, on the basis of common general knowledge, would have combined 
the submitted documents in such a way as to arrive at the subject-matter of 
claim 1 (argument). 
Evidence admissible in EPO proceedings is not confined to that listed in 
Art. 117(1). "Taking of evidence" within the meaning of Art. 117 comprises 
Part E – Chapter IV-14 

 
 
the submission or gathering of evidence of any kind, particularly the filing of 
documents. 
Pure arguments are not evidence (see T 642/92). 
4.3 Examination of evidence 
When evidence is submitted, the first thing to establish is what fact is being 
asserted, and then whether that fact is relevant to the decision. If not, the 
assertion is no longer considered and the evidence is not examined further. 
If the alleged fact is relevant, the next point is whether it is proven by the 
evidence submitted. 
When evidence is examined, since the EPC says nothing about how the 
outcome of taking of evidence must be assessed, the principle of unfettered 
consideration applies. This means that its content and its significance for 
the proceedings are assessed in the light of the particular circumstances of 
each individual case (e.g. time, place, type of evidence, position of witness 
in firm, etc.). The principle of unfettered consideration also means that EPO 
departments are empowered to evaluate evidence submitted by the parties 
in any appropriate manner, or indeed to disregard it as unimportant or 
irrelevant. In particular it has to be decided on a case-by-case basis when a 
particular piece of evidence is sufficient. 
When deciding whether an alleged fact is accepted, the division may use 
the criterion of the "balance of probabilities", which means that it is satisfied 
that one set of facts is more likely to be true than the other. Furthermore, 
the more serious the issue, the more convincing must be the evidence to 
support it (see T 750/94). For example, if a decision might result in 
revocation of the patent in a case concerning alleged prior use, the 
available evidence has to be very critically and strictly examined. In 
particular, in the case of alleged prior use for which little if any evidence 
would be available to the patentee to establish that no prior use had taken 
place, the division has to cede to the stricter criterion close to absolute 
conviction, i.e. beyond any reasonable doubt (see T 97/94). 
When parties make conflicting assertions, the division must decide which 
evidence is the most convincing. If it cannot establish which allegation is 
right on the basis of the evidence put forward, it must decide on the basis of 
the burden of proof, i.e. against the party bearing that burden but unable to 
prove its point convincingly. 
4.4 Asking for evidence 
When pointing out that it cannot accept a line of argument because certain 
facts have not been proven, the division must do so as neutrally and 
objectively as possible. In particular, it may neither 
(a) 
require a specific kind of evidence (see T 474/04), nor 
(b) 
prescribe the content of the evidence (e.g. the wording of a sworn 
statement in writing (see T 804/92). 
 

Part E – Chapter IV-15 
 
The taking of evidence in each of the forms listed in Art. 117 is done at the 
discretion of the EPO department in question, i.e. only if that department 
considers it necessary. This will be the case, for example, if a fact relevant 
to the decision needs to be proven. 
4.5 Evaluation of the testimony of a witness 
After the witnesses have been heard, the party or parties must be given an 
opportunity of making observations. The observations may be made either 
in oral proceedings following the taking of evidence or exceptionally in 
writing after transmission of the minutes of the taking of evidence. The 
decision on this matter will rest with the competent department. The parties 
may file requests accordingly. 
Only when this has been done may the competent department proceed to 
evaluate the evidence. Where a witness's testimony which is crucial to the 
decision has been challenged by a party but the department regards it as 
credible, or where a witness's oral or written testimony is disregarded in its 
decision as being not credible, the department concerned must state the 
grounds for its view in its decision. 
In evaluating a witness's oral or written testimony, special attention is to be 
paid to the following: 
(i) 
what is important is what witnesses can relate concerning the points 
at issue on the basis of their own knowledge or views, and whether 
they have practical experience in the field in question. Second-hand 
assertions based on something heard from third parties are for the 
most part worthless on their own. It is also important from the point of 
view of the evaluation whether the witness was involved in the event 
himself or only knows of it as an observer or listener; 
(ii) 
in the event of long intervals of time (several years) between the 
event in question and the testimony, it is to be borne in mind that 
most people's power of recall is limited without the support of 
documentary evidence; 
(iii) 
where testimony appears to conflict, the texts of the statements 
concerned are closely compared with one another. 
Apparent contradiction in the testimony of witnesses may sometimes 
be resolved in this way. For example, a close examination of 
apparently contradictory statements by witnesses as to whether a 
substance X was commonly used for a particular purpose may show 
that there is in fact no contradiction at all, in that while one witness 
was saying specifically that substance X was not used for that 
particular purpose, the other witness was saying no more than that 
substances like X, or a certain class of substances to which X 
belonged, were commonly used for this particular purpose without 
intending to make any statement regarding substance X itself; 
(iv) 
an employee of a party to the proceedings can be heard as a witness 
(see T 482/89). The possible partiality of a witness determines how 
Part E – Chapter IV-16 

 
 
the 
evidence 
is 
assessed, 
not 
whether 
it 
is 
admissible 
(see T 443/93). 
4.6 Evaluation of the testimony of parties 
Oral or written evidence given by parties or their refusal to give evidence 
are evaluated in the light of their special interest in the matter. Because of 
their special interest, the testimony of parties possibly should not be 
evaluated on the same level as that of neutral witnesses. This applies 
above all where parties have been present when witnesses have been 
heard and have ascertained the attitude of the competent department. The 
considerations set out in E-IV, 4.5 (Evaluation of the testimony of a witness) 
apply mutatis mutandis. 
4.7 Evaluation of an expert opinion 
The competent department must examine whether the grounds on which 
an expert opinion is based are convincing. Notwithstanding its discretion in 
the evaluation of evidence, it may not disregard an expert opinion in the 
absence of grounds based on adequate specialist knowledge of its own or 
of another expert, irrespective of whether the latter expert is an 
independent expert commissioned under Rule 121 or an expert who 
testifies at the request of one of the parties. 
4.8 Evaluation of an inspection 
In the case of a demonstration, a specific test programme under specific 
conditions is agreed in advance. During the demonstration itself care must 
be taken to ensure that the characteristics or conditions of operation 
claimed for the invention are complied with. Where an invention is 
compared under test with an item forming part of the state of the art, as far 
as possible the same or comparable test conditions must be applied to 
both. 
 

Part E – Chapter V-1 
 
Chapter V – Derogations from the language of 
the proceedings in oral proceedings 
1. Use of an official language 
Any party to oral proceedings before the EPO may, in lieu of the language 
of the proceedings, use one of the other official languages of the EPO, on 
condition that such party either gives notice to the EPO at least one month 
before the date laid down for such oral proceedings or makes provision for 
interpreting into the language of the proceedings. In the former case, it is 
the responsibility of the EPO to provide for interpretation at its own 
expense. 
A party must be clear as to which official language it wishes to use. It then 
has a right to both speak and hear that language, as long as the conditions 
of Rule 4 have been fulfilled. The party does not, however, have a right to 
have one language in which it will speak and a different language in which 
it will hear (see T 774/05). 
The language of the proceedings as defined in Art. 14(3) cannot be 
changed. This means that any amendments to the application or patent 
have to be filed in the language of the proceedings (Rule 3(2)). 
If all parties have indicated that they will use another official language, the 
division may depart from the language of the proceedings so as to manage 
without or with fewer interpreters (this question normally arises only in 
opposition 
proceedings). 
The 
parties' 
summonses 
are 
therefore 
accompanied by information which encourages them to agree how this can 
be achieved. 
It may be possible to agree to limit the interpreting to "one-way", i.e. from 
one language into another but not the other way round. If a comment made 
in one language has clearly been misunderstood, the division may clarify it 
in another. Under no circumstances however can its members officially act 
as interpreters. 
2. Language of a contracting state or other language 
Any party may likewise use one of the official languages of the contracting 
states, other than English, French or German, on condition that they make 
provision for interpreting into the language of the proceedings. However, if 
the parties and the EPO agree, any language may be used in oral 
proceedings without interpreting or prior notice. 
3. Exceptions from sections 1 and 2 
Derogations from the provisions of Rule 4(1) are permitted, and these are 
at the discretion of the EPO. Clearly such permission must depend on the 
circumstances of the individual case. It may, for example, be envisaged 
that parties are unable to give one month's notice through no fault of their 
own, and, although they have made arrangements for an interpreter, the 
latter is unable (e.g. through illness) to attend. If, in such circumstances, the 
EPO is unable to provide for interpreting, it postpones the oral proceedings 
if they occur at the examination stage. However, in opposition proceedings, 
Rule 4(1) and (5) 
Rule 4(1) and (4) 
Rule 4(1) 
Part E – Chapter V-2 

 
 
the oral proceedings continue if the parties agree and the employees of the 
EPO involved in the proceedings can cope with the language. In other 
cases, the EPO postpones the oral proceedings and any costs incurred by 
the innocent party as a result of the postponement are a matter for 
apportionment under Art. 104. 
4. 
Language used in the taking of evidence 
When the evidence is being taken, a party, witness or expert who is unable 
to express himself adequately in English, French or German or in any other 
official language of the contracting states is permitted to use another 
language. The EPO is responsible for interpreting into the language of the 
proceedings, assuming that this is necessary, if the evidence is taken at the 
request of the EPO itself. However, if the taking of evidence follows a 
request by a party to the proceedings, the use of a language other than 
English, French or German is allowed only if that party provides for 
interpreting into the language of the proceedings or, at the discretion of the 
EPO, into any one of English, French or German. This discretion is 
exercised in opposition proceedings only if the other parties agree. 
5. 
Language used by employees of the EPO 
Employees of the EPO may use in oral proceedings an official language of 
the EPO other than the language of proceedings. The parties must be 
informed accordingly prior to the oral proceedings unless it can be 
reasonably assumed that they would not object to this, e.g. because they 
have equally requested to use that different official language. 
However, employees may not depart from the language of the proceedings 
without good reason. Unless the parties are competent in the language 
used, the EPO provides for interpreting into the language of the 
proceedings at its own expense. 
6. 
Language used in the minutes 
Where the official language actually employed in oral proceedings is not the 
language of the proceedings as defined in Art. 14(3), if the examining or 
opposition division or the Legal Division considers it appropriate and 
subject to explicit agreement of all parties concerned, the minutes may be 
recorded in the official language actually employed in the oral proceedings. 
Prior to the agreement of the parties, their attention is drawn to the fact that 
the EPO will not provide translations of the minutes into the language of the 
proceedings as defined in Art. 14(3). This condition, as well as the 
declaration of agreement of the party or parties, is recorded in the minutes. 
Statements made in English, French or German are entered in the minutes 
of the proceedings in the language employed (Rule 4(6)). 
Statements made in any other language must be entered in the official 
language into which they are translated. 
Amendments to the text of the description or claims of a European patent 
application or European patent made during oral proceedings must be 
entered in the minutes in the language of the proceedings. 
Rule 4(3) 
Rule 4(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter V-3 
 
If the proceedings are conducted in a language other than English, French 
or German and no interpretation is effected, statements are entered in the 
minutes in the language employed and the EPO subsequently provides in 
the minutes a translation into the language of the proceedings. 
 

Part E – Chapter VI-1 
 
Chapter VI – Examination by the EPO of its own 
motion; facts, evidence or grounds 
not submitted in due time; observations by third 
parties 
1. Examination by the EPO of its own motion 
1.1 General remarks 
In proceedings before it, the EPO examines the facts of its own motion; it is 
not restricted in this examination to the facts, evidence and arguments 
provided by the parties and the relief sought. This principle of examination 
by the EPO of its own motion must be complied with by the competent 
department during all proceedings pending before it. Thus, once 
proceedings have been initiated, e.g. once a valid request for examination 
has been filed or an admissible notice of opposition has been filed 
(although it may subsequently be withdrawn), if there is reason to believe, 
e.g. from personal knowledge or from observations presented by third 
parties, that there are facts and evidence not yet considered in the 
proceedings which in whole or in part prejudice the granting or 
maintenance of the European patent, such facts and evidence must be 
included in those examined by the EPO of its own motion pursuant to 
Art. 114(1). See D-V, 2 for the extent of substantive examination of the 
facts and evidence in opposition proceedings. 
1.2 Limits on the obligation to undertake examination 
However, the obligation to undertake such examination must be kept within 
limits in the interests of procedural expediency. For example, in opposition 
proceedings, an offer to prove that an alleged public prior use took place 
will not be taken up if the opponent making such an allegation has ceased 
to participate in the proceedings and the necessary evidence cannot be 
easily obtained at a reasonable cost. 
The unity of the subject-matter of the European patent is not to be 
examined in opposition proceedings (G 1/91, see D-V, 2.2). 
2. Late-filed submissions 
The EPO may disregard facts or evidence (e.g. publications) which are not 
submitted in due time by the parties concerned. 
This also applies to grounds for opposition not submitted in due time, 
together with supporting facts and evidence in opposition proceedings 
(see D-V, 2.2). Note in this respect that according to G 1/95 and G 7/95, 
Art. 100(a) does not constitute one single ground for opposition, but has to 
be considered a collection of individual grounds for opposition, 
i.e. individual legal bases for objection to the maintenance of a patent. 
This applies 
not 
only 
to 
distinctly 
different 
objections, 
such as 
subject-matter which is not patentable (Art. 52(2)) as compared to 
subject-matter which is not capable of industrial application (Art. 57), but 
also to an objection for lack of novelty as opposed to an objection for lack 
of inventive step. 
Art. 114(1) 
Art. 114(2) 
Part E – Chapter VI-2 

 
 
New arguments based on facts, evidence and grounds constituting the 
legal and factual framework of the opposition cannot be disregarded. 
In deciding whether to admit facts, evidence or grounds for opposition not 
filed in due time, their relevance to the decision, the state of the procedure 
and the reasons for belated submission are to be considered. If 
examination of late-filed grounds for opposition, late-filed facts or late-filed 
evidence reveals without any further investigation (i.e. prima facie) that 
they are relevant, i.e. that the basis of the envisaged decision would be 
changed, then the competent department has to take such grounds, facts 
or evidence into consideration no matter what stage the procedure has 
reached and whatever the reasons for belated submission. In that case, the 
principle of examination by the EPO of its own motion under Art. 114(1) 
takes precedence over the possibility of disregarding facts or evidence 
under Art. 114(2) (see T 156/84). Note, however, the limits on the obligation 
to undertake further examinations as set out in E-VI, 1.2. Otherwise, the 
department informs the party concerned in the decision, with due regard to 
Art. 113(1) (see T 281/00), that the facts, evidence and/or grounds for 
opposition were not submitted in due time and, since they are not relevant 
to the decision, will be disregarded pursuant to Art. 114(2). On the 
apportionment of any costs arising from the late filing of facts and evidence, 
see D-IX, 1.4. 
The latest date up to which submissions can be considered at all is the date 
on which the decision is handed over to the EPO's internal postal service 
for transmittal to the parties (see G 12/91). 
The above applies in written proceedings; in oral proceedings submissions 
can only be considered up to the pronouncement of the decision 
(see E-III, 9). 
2.1 General principles in opposition proceedings 
As far as the assessment of late filing in opposition proceedings is 
concerned, the rulings of the Enlarged Board of Appeal in G 9/91 and 
G 10/91 apply. According to these decisions, in principle, the opposition is 
to be examined to the extent and on the grounds submitted during the 
period for opposition. Under Art. 114(1) the opposition division may go 
beyond this framework if prima facie maintenance of the patent is 
prejudiced. The principles developed by the Enlarged Board with respect to 
new grounds also apply to late-filed facts and evidence (see T 1002/92). 
Therefore late-filed facts and evidence are to be admitted into the 
proceedings only if they are prima facie relevant, i.e. if they would change 
the envisaged decision, see E-VI, 2. 
If a patent proprietor replies to a notice of opposition by amending the 
patent, such a request for amendment cannot be considered as late-filed 
and has to be admitted into the proceedings (Rule 79(1)). 
Thus, if the proprietor limits the patent to the subject-matter of a dependent 
claim as granted, new facts and evidence submitted by the opponent in 
reply to this amendment are as a general rule to be treated as late-filed and 
only to be admitted under Art. 114(1) if they are prima facie relevant 
 

Part E – Chapter VI-3 
 
because the opponent must be prepared for this type of amendment and 
must have provided material during the nine-month opposition period. 
If the new facts and submissions are not prima facie relevant, they are to 
be disregarded under Art. 114(2). An exception to this rule is where the 
patent specification as granted contained a large number of dependent 
claims and the opponent could not reasonably have been expected to deal 
with all of them in the notice of opposition. 
If, however, the proprietor amends the patent at an early stage of the 
proceedings in a manner not foreseeable by the opponent, e.g. by taking 
up features disclosed in the description, the opponent will have the 
opportunity to provide new facts and evidence, i.e. possibly even to submit 
a new ground for opposition and new documents. Such a submission has 
to be admitted into the proceedings because the subject of the proceedings 
has changed. At a late stage in the proceedings such unforeseeable 
amendments 
are 
subject 
to 
the 
criterion 
of 
"clear 
allowability" 
(see H-II, 2.7.1). 
2.2 Submissions filed in preparation for or during oral proceedings 
If oral proceedings are arranged, the division issues a summons together 
with an annex drawing attention to the points to be discussed (Rule 116(1)) 
and normally containing the division's provisional and non-binding opinion 
(see E-III, 6 and D-VI, 3.2). 
2.2.1 New facts and evidence  
Rule 116(1), being an implementation of Art. 114(2) as a further 
development on the existing jurisprudence regarding facts or evidence not 
filed in due time, makes it clear that the examining or opposition division 
has a discretion to disregard new facts or evidence for the reason that they 
have been filed after the date indicated in the summons under Rule 116 
unless they have to be admitted because the subject of the proceedings 
has changed. 
For instance, if the opposition division states in the annex to the summons 
that the patent is likely to be revoked, and a timely filed request for 
amendment is admitted but relates to subject-matter not covered by the 
claims as granted, the subject of the proceedings has changed. 
Consequently, new facts and evidence submitted by the opponent in 
response to these requests will be admitted into the proceedings, even if 
they arrive after the final date set under Rule 116. 
However, if the proprietor's requests relate to amendments based only on 
claims as granted, new facts and evidence submitted by the opponent will 
be treated as late-filed even if submitted before the final date, i.e. they will 
be admitted only if they are prima facie relevant unless there are other 
aspects militating in favour of admitting them, such as a large number of 
dependent claims in the patent as granted (E-VI, 2.1). 
Similarly, if in the provisional and non-binding opinion the opposition 
division reaches the conclusion that maintenance of the patent is not 
prejudiced by the facts and evidence submitted so far by the opponent, this 
Rule 116(1) 
Part E – Chapter VI-4 

 
 
fact per se does not give the opponent the right to have new facts and 
evidence admitted into the proceedings, even if submitted before the final 
date fixed under Rule 116(1). 
2.2.2 Amendments filed in preparation for or during oral proceedings 
Rule 116(2) imposes the same obligations on the applicant or patent 
proprietor when submitting new documents which meet the requirements of 
the EPC (i.e. new amendments to the description, claims and drawings) as 
Rule 116(1) imposes on the parties in submitting new facts and evidence. 
The examining or opposition division has the discretion to disregard 
amendments filed after the date set under Rule 116(1) as being late-filed 
unless they have to be admitted because the subject of the proceedings 
has changed. Amendments submitted before the date set under 
Rule 116(1) cannot, as a rule, be considered as being late-filed. 
The following are examples of what would normally constitute a change of 
subject of the proceedings:  
– 
the opposition division admits under Art. 114(1) new facts and 
evidence or a new ground of opposition because they are prima facie 
relevant; 
– 
the examining division cites a further relevant document for the first 
time (H-II, 2.7); 
– 
the examining or opposition division departs from a previously 
notified opinion: for example, contrary to its preliminary opinion set 
out in the annex to the summons, the opposition division concludes 
during oral proceedings that an objection prejudices the maintenance 
of the patent. 
In these examples, a request from the applicant or proprietor for a 
corresponding amendment cannot be rejected as being late-filed even if 
submitted after the date set under Rule 116(1). If, however, after a change 
of opinion by the division, the applicant or proprietor files a new request that 
reintroduces subject-matter against which the division has already raised 
an objection, the division has discretion to disregard the new request due to 
it being prima facie not allowable. 
On receipt of amendments filed after the final date set under Rule 116(1), 
the division therefore first analyses whether the amendments were filed in 
due course in response to a change of the subject of the proceedings. Only 
if this is not the case does the division have the discretion to disregard the 
amendments. This discretion is to be exercised according to the principles 
set out in E-VI, 2.2.3. The mere fact that amendments are filed after a given 
date is not on its own a legal basis for not admitting them. 
Rule 116(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter VI-5 
 
2.2.3 Principles relating to the exercise of discretion  
In exercising its discretion under Art. 114(2) and Rule 116(1) and (2), the 
division must assess all relevant factors of the case. 
The division will in the first place have to consider the relevance of the 
late-filed facts or evidence (see E-VI, 2) or the allowability of the late-filed 
amendments on a prima facie basis. If these facts or evidence are not 
prima facie relevant, i.e. if they do not appear to affect the outcome of the 
proceedings (T 320/15), or if these amendments are not clearly allowable 
(see H-II, 2.7.1), they will not be admitted. 
For instance, if the opposition division states in the annex to the summons 
that the patent is likely to be revoked and the proprietor in response 
submits amendments after the final date set under Rule 116(1), possibly 
not until the oral proceedings, the division could, in principle, treat such 
requests as late-filed and apply the criterion of "clear allowability" 
(see H-II, 2.7.1) in judging whether they can be admitted into the 
proceedings. However, the division will consider admitting such requests 
into the proceedings if they relate to the subject-matter of dependent claims 
as granted. 
Convergence of requests is another of the relevant factors that the division 
may consider when exercising its discretion (for a definition of 
convergence, see H-III, 3.3.2.2). 
For the purpose of admissibility, a late-filed document's relevance is 
normally decided relative to the amended claims against which it is cited. 
Documents that have limited relevance to an initial set of claims may 
acquire new relevance as a result of subsequent amendments to those 
claims (T 366/11). 
Before admitting these submissions, the division will next consider 
procedural expediency, the possibility of abuse of the procedure (e.g. one 
of the parties is obviously protracting the proceedings) and the question 
whether the parties can reasonably be expected to familiarise themselves 
in the time available with the new facts or evidence or the proposed 
amendments. 
As regards procedural expediency, where the late-filed facts or evidence 
are relevant but their introduction would cause a prolonged adjournment of 
the proceedings, the division may decide not to admit these facts or 
evidence in the proceedings. An example would be where the witness still 
has to be found or lengthy tests are still necessary. The division may, 
however, also postpone the proceedings and in doing so may have to 
consider the apportionment of costs in opposition proceedings (Art. 104). 
Similarly, if late-filed requests are based on subject-matter not previously 
covered by the claims, they will normally not be admitted into the 
proceedings also for reasons of procedural efficiency. Admission of such 
requests could give rise to a postponement of oral proceedings and to a 
decision on apportionment of costs. 
Art. 114(2), 
Rule 116(1) and 
Rule 116(2) 
Part E – Chapter VI-6 

 
 
Examples of possible abuse of the proceedings would be: 
– 
The patent proprietor introduces at short notice a proliferation of 
auxiliary requests which are not a reaction to the course of the 
proceedings. 
– 
The opponent knowingly abstains from raising an assertion of public 
prior use based on its own activities until late in the proceedings, 
even though the evidence in its support had become fully available 
earlier (see T 534/89). 
– 
The applicant or patent proprietor presents a large number of 
requests or incomplete variants of requests and invites the division to 
choose, shifting the responsibility for determining the content of the 
application or patent to the division. It is the duty of any party to 
proceedings to make its own case and to formulate its own requests 
(see T 446/00). 
Concerning the question of whether the parties can reasonably be 
expected to familiarise themselves in the time available with the new facts 
or evidence or the proposed amendments: 
– 
It may only become apparent in the oral proceedings that the 
pending request submitted to overcome grounds for opposition is not 
allowable under the EPC. The opponent must always expect to have 
to discuss subject-matter based on dependent claims as granted if 
they are reasonable in number. 
– 
The proprietor is in principle free to withdraw previously submitted 
amendments and defend the patent as granted unless this would 
constitute an abuse of the proceedings. 
2.2.4 Right to be heard 
Generally, the parties must be heard before the division decides on 
whether or not to admit late-filed submissions.  
For instance, if the opponent introduces a new ground for opposition during 
oral proceedings, they must always be granted the right to be heard. This 
means that the division must give the parties the opportunity to put forward 
arguments and duly consider them before deciding on the admissibility of 
the new ground. Similarly, where the opponent files pertinent new material, 
the patent proprietor must be given a chance to present comments and 
submit amendments. If the opposition division approves the introduction of 
new facts or evidence and if the other parties have not had sufficient time to 
study them, it grants, where easily comprehensible subject-matter is 
involved, the parties an opportunity to familiarise themselves with it, 
possibly by briefly interrupting the oral proceedings. If this is not feasible, 
the other parties must, upon request, be given the opportunity to comment 
in the proceedings subsequent to the oral proceedings, where appropriate 
in a further set of oral proceedings. Where possible, however, oral 
proceedings will not be adjourned.  
Art. 113(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter VI-7 
 
Where possible, legal commentaries, decisions (of a board of appeal, for 
example) and reports on legal decisions which are to be referred to in oral 
proceedings must be notified to the opposition division and the other parties 
in good time before the proceedings. They may, however, be quoted or 
submitted for the first time in the oral proceedings themselves if the 
opposition division agrees after consulting the parties. 
The reasons for the decision on the admissibility of late-filed facts, evidence 
and requests have to be provided in the written decision and must not 
come as a surprise. A mere reference to the division's discretionary power 
is not sufficient (E-X, 2.10). In examination proceedings, reasons only need 
to be provided if the late-filed facts, evidence or requests are not admitted. 
2.2.5 Costs 
In opposition, relevant facts and evidence submitted at a late stage of the 
proceedings, possibly not until the oral proceedings for example, could give 
rise to a decision on apportionment of costs, see D-IX, 1.2, if so requested. 
As regards the costs which may be incurred for late submissions, see also 
D-IX, 1.4. 
3. Observations by third parties 
Following publication of the European patent application under Art. 93, any 
person may present observations concerning the patentability of the 
invention. Although lack of novelty and/or inventive step are the most 
common observations, third-party observations may also be directed to 
clarity 
(Art. 84), 
sufficiency 
of 
disclosure 
(Art. 83), 
patentability 
(Art. 52(2) and (3), 53 or 57) and unallowable amendments (Art. 76(1), 
123(2) and 123(3)). 
Such observations must be filed in writing in English, French or German 
and must include a statement of the grounds on which they are based. The 
person filing them may not be a party to the proceedings before the EPO. 
The web interface provided by the EPO is the preferred means of filing 
such observations (see OJ EPO 2017, A86). Observations may be filed 
anonymously. 
Documentary evidence and, in particular, publications submitted in support 
of the arguments may be filed in any language. However, the EPO may 
request that a translation into one of its official languages be filed within a 
period to be specified; otherwise the evidence will be disregarded. 
Although third parties are sent acknowledgment of the receipt of their 
observations (if these were not filed anonymously), the EPO does not 
specifically inform them of any further action it takes in response to them. 
However, the outcome of the evaluation by the competent division will 
briefly be indicated in the respective office action from the EPO (e.g. in a 
communication or in the intention to grant) and will thus be visible to the 
public. 
The observations, including those filed anonymously, become part of the 
file. They are communicated without delay to applicants or proprietors, who 
may comment on them. If they call into question the patentability of the 
Art. 115 
Rule 114(1) 
Rule 3(3) 
Rule 114(2) 
Part E – Chapter VI-8 

 
 
invention in whole or in part, the examining or opposition division will take 
them into account in the next office action. If the observations relate to 
alleged prior art available other than from a document, e.g. from use, this is 
taken into account only if the alleged facts either are not disputed by the 
applicant or proprietor or are established beyond reasonable doubt. 
Observations by third parties received in examination after dispatch of a 
Rule 71(3) communication but before the decision to grant (EPO Form 
2006A) has been handed over to the EPO postal service will be considered 
by the examining division. If they are relevant, the examining division will 
resume examination. Otherwise, brief substantive feedback will be provided 
in the file. 
Observations by third parties received after the decision has been 
pronounced in oral proceedings (e.g. in the case of a refusal or in 
opposition) or issued in written proceedings and handed over to the EPO 
postal service (e.g. in the case of a grant decision or if, in opposition, no 
oral proceedings were held), will be included in the file without taking note 
of their content. 
Observations by third parties received once proceedings are no longer 
pending will be neither taken into account nor made available for file 
inspection. They will however be made available for file inspection and 
considered if the proceedings before the EPO become pending again, 
e.g. upon the start of any opposition or limitation proceedings. 
The EPO will make every effort to issue the next office action within three 
months of receipt of third-party observations under Art. 115 by the 
examining division, provided the observations are substantiated and have 
not been filed anonymously. Where the observations are received at a time 
when a reply from the applicant to a communication is outstanding, this 
period starts from receipt of the reply at the EPO. 
The EPO will generally apply the practice regarding third-party observations 
filed in the Euro-direct procedure mutatis mutandis to third-party 
observations filed during the international phase upon entry of the 
Euro-PCT application into the European phase. 
Where a third-party observation was filed during the international phase, 
the EPO as designated/elected Office will consider its content upon entry 
into the European phase once this becomes available to it. The examining 
division will make every effort to issue the next office action within three 
months after expiry of the period under Rule 161, but only on condition that 
the third party has clearly expressed its wish to achieve expedited 
treatment in the European phase, that the observation was filed 
non-anonymously and that it was substantiated. A third party wishing to 
achieve such a result in the European phase must, therefore, make this 
clear in the observation or file the observation with the EPO as 
designated/elected Office. 
 

Part E – Chapter VI-9 
 
4. External complaints 
External complaints can concern any service or product delivered by the 
EPO and can be submitted by any person, including parties to proceedings 
before the EPO (for enquiries as to the processing of files, see E-VIII, 7). 
Complaints can be submitted using the online form available at 
epo.org/en/formal-complaint. 
Complaints are forwarded to a dedicated EPO department responsible for 
(i) 
ensuring that the complaint is dealt with fairly and efficiently and that 
suitable measures are taken to address it; and 
(ii) 
providing a comprehensive reply to the complaint. 
The complaint handling procedure does not replace the procedures laid 
down by the EPC; nor does the department responsible for handling 
complaints take decisions on procedural requests. Hence, the relevant 
department competent for the respective proceedings decides on: 
(a) 
complaints relating to procedural and/or substantive aspects of 
specific pending proceedings which are submitted by a party to those 
proceedings. All parties to the proceedings will be informed 
accordingly. 
(b) 
complaints relating to substantive issues which are submitted by a 
third party while proceedings are pending before the EPO. Such a 
submission will be treated as a third-party observation (see E-VI, 3). 
The department responsible for handling complaints promptly forwards any 
complaint relating to appeal proceedings to the EPO Boards of Appeal Unit. 
Complaints having a substantive and/or procedural bearing on proceedings 
before the EPO, as well as replies thereto by the department responsible 
for handling complaints, will only exceptionally be excluded from file 
inspection (see D-II, 4.3; decision of the President of the EPO concerning 
documents excluded from file inspection, OJ EPO 2007, Special edition 
No. 3, J.3). 
Art. 128(4) 
Rule 144(d) 
 

Part E – Chapter VII-1 
 
Chapter VII – Interruption, stay and 
consolidation of the proceedings 
1. Interruption 
1.1 Cases in which the proceedings may be interrupted 
Pursuant to Rule 142(1), proceedings before the EPO are interrupted in 
one of the following events: 
(i) 
in the event of the death or legal incapacity of the applicant for or 
proprietor of a European patent or of the person authorised by 
national law to act on their behalf. To the extent that the above 
events do not affect the authorisation of a representative appointed 
under Art. 134, proceedings will be interrupted only on application by 
such representative; 
(ii) 
in the event of the applicant for or proprietor of a European patent, as 
a result of some action taken against their property, being prevented 
by legal reasons from continuing the proceedings before the EPO; or 
(iii) 
in the event of the death or legal incapacity of the representative of 
an applicant for or proprietor of a European patent or of their being 
prevented for legal reasons resulting from action taken against their 
property from continuing the proceedings before the EPO. 
In principle, the EPO interrupts proceedings pursuant to Rule 142 ex officio. 
In the case of Rule 142(1)(a) last sentence, however, proceedings are 
interrupted on request only. 
1.2 Responsible department 
The Legal Division of the EPO bears sole responsibility for the interruption 
and resumption of proceedings under Rule 142 (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
1.3 Date of interruption 
An interruption is registered (in general retroactively) with legal effect from 
the date of the occurrence of the event. In cases where proceedings are 
interrupted on request, the interruption is effected as from the date of 
receipt of the request at the EPO. 
The parties are informed of the interruption of proceedings and the reasons 
for it. The date of interruption as well as the date of resumption of 
proceedings are recorded in the European Patent Register. 
1.4 Resumption of proceedings 
When, in the cases referred to in Rule 142(1)(a) or (b), the EPO has been 
informed of the identity of the person authorised to continue the 
proceedings before the EPO, it notifies that person and, where applicable, 
any third party, that the proceedings will be resumed as from a specified 
date. The date is set in such a manner as to allow this person to familiarise 
himself with the matter. 
Rule 142(1) 
Rule 142(1)(a) 
Rule 142(1)(b) 
Rule 142(1)(c) 
Art. 20 
Rule 143(1)(t) 
Rule 142(2) 
Part E – Chapter VII-2 

 
 
If, three years after the publication of the date of interruption in the 
European Patent Bulletin, the EPO has not been informed of the identity of 
the person authorised to continue the proceedings, it may set a date on 
which it intends to resume the proceedings of its own motion. 
This date may be postponed upon reasoned request and submission of 
relevant documentary evidence in the case of a claim of succession in title 
in respect of the European patent application/European patent concerned. 
As a consequence of the ex officio resumption, the proceedings will 
continue with the applicant/proprietor registered in the European Patent 
Register, and procedural actions may become necessary and/or fees due 
(see also the notice from the EPO dated 29 May 2020, OJ EPO 2020, 
A76). 
Communications and decisions of the EPO which have been notified during 
the interruption period are to be regarded as null and void and will be 
notified anew after resumption of proceedings by the responsible 
department. 
In the case referred to in Rule 142(1)(c), the proceedings will be resumed 
when the EPO has been informed of the appointment of a new 
representative of the applicant or when the EPO has notified to the other 
parties the communication of the appointment of a new representative of 
the proprietor of the patent. If, the EPO has not been informed of the 
appointment of a new representative within a period of three months after 
the beginning of the interruption of the proceedings, it communicates to the 
applicant for or proprietor of the patent: 
(i) 
where Art. 133(2) (mandatory appointment of a representative) is 
applicable, that the European patent application will be deemed to be 
withdrawn or the European patent will be revoked if the information is 
not submitted within two months after this communication is notified; 
or 
(ii) 
where Art. 133(2) is not applicable, that the proceedings will be 
resumed with the applicant for or proprietor of the patent as from the 
date on which this communication is notified. 
A copy of the communication will be forwarded to the other parties. 
1.5 Resumption of time limits 
Time limits in force on the date of interruption of the proceedings begin 
again, in their original length, as from the day on which the proceedings are 
resumed, with the exception of the time limits for requesting examination 
and for paying renewal fees. 
If the time limit for filing the request for examination is in force on the date 
of interruption of the proceedings, it is suspended (J 7/83; see also 
E-VIII, 1.4). Thereafter it resumes for the time it still has to run, or for at 
least the two months prescribed by Rule 142(4), second sentence. 
Rule 142(3) 
Rule 142(3)(a) 
Rule 142(3)(b) 
Rule 142(4) 
 

Part E – Chapter VII-3 
 
Concerning renewal fees falling due during the period of interruption, 
Rule 142(4) has to be interpreted as deferring the due date for their 
payment until the date the proceedings are resumed (J 902/87). Thus, such 
renewal fees may be paid without additional fee at the date of resumption 
and in the amounts applicable on that date. They may also be paid within 
six months of said date, provided that an additional fee is also paid within 
said period (Rule 51(2)). 
If the time limit for paying renewal fees with the additional fee referred to in 
Rule 51(2) is in force on the date of interruption of the proceedings, it is 
suspended and begins to run again for the remaining period on the date of 
resumption. 
2. Stay of proceedings under Rule 14 due to pending national 
entitlement proceedings 
If third parties provide evidence that they have instituted proceedings 
against the applicant seeking a decision within the meaning of Art. 61(1), 
the proceedings for grant are stayed unless the third parties communicate 
to the EPO in writing their consent to the continuation of proceedings. This 
consent is irrevocable. For further details see A-IV, 2.2 and subsections, 
and D-VII, 4.1. 
3. Stay of proceedings when a referral to the Enlarged Board of 
Appeal is pending 
Where a referral to the Enlarged Board of Appeal is pending and the 
outcome of examination or opposition proceedings depends entirely on the 
answer to the questions referred to the Enlarged Board of Appeal, the 
proceedings may be stayed by the examining or opposition division on its 
own initiative or on request of a party or the parties. 
The party/ies will be informed of the intention to stay the proceedings. If no 
reply is received from the party/ies with regard to the intention to stay, or if 
the party/ies explicitly agree(s), the proceedings will be stayed and the 
party/ies will be informed thereof. If the party/ies do(es) not agree in writing 
with the intention to stay, and if the examining or opposition division 
maintains its opinion, a decision to stay will be despatched. A decision to 
stay the proceedings or refusing a request to stay is not separately 
appealable; it can only be appealed together with the final decision on the 
application/patent (see E-X, 3). 
During the stay of proceedings, a PACE request will have no effect. After 
their resumption, proceedings are again accelerated. Where the 
proceedings are not stayed, they will be decided according to existing 
practice. 
A stay of proceedings due to dependency on a referral to the Enlarged 
Board of Appeal is to be distinguished from a stay of proceedings pursuant 
to Rule 14 (see E-VII, 2). 
Rule 14(1) 
Part E – Chapter VII-4 

 
 
4. 
Consolidation of proceedings 
The examining or opposition division or the Legal Division may consolidate 
proceedings if this is considered useful in order to expedite proceedings in 
the specific circumstances of the case (see J 17/92). 
Consolidation is considered inter alia if the parties and the underlying facts 
of the proceedings are identical. It is for the responsible division to decide 
whether proceedings are to be consolidated in the interest of procedural 
efficiency and with a view to expediting proceedings and, if so, for what 
purpose. Consolidation may concern the entire procedure or only individual 
procedural steps such as the taking of evidence or the conduct of oral 
proceedings. 
The parties are to be informed of consolidation. This information includes a 
statement about the purpose of consolidation. Where proceedings are 
consolidated for the taking of evidence, this is to be notified in the order to 
take evidence and in the annex to the summons to oral proceedings. These 
must be sent to all parties to the consolidated proceedings. Likewise, 
submissions from the parties filed in respect of only one of the proceedings 
which are relevant to the consolidated parts of the proceedings must be 
included in all the files concerned. 
Upon fulfilment of its purpose, consolidation is to be set aside and the 
proceedings are to be continued separately. Again, the parties must be 
informed accordingly. 
A decision to consolidate proceedings is not subject to a separate appeal 
but may be appealed only together with the final decision unless the 
decision allows a separate appeal (see E-X, 3). The same applies 
mutatis mutandis to a decision setting aside consolidation. 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-1 
 
Chapter VIII – Time limits, loss of rights, further 
and accelerated processing and 
re-establishment of rights 
1. Time limits and loss of rights resulting from failure to respond 
within a time limit 
1.1 Determination of time limits 
The EPC imposes time limits upon parties to proceedings. In the EPC, a 
"time limit" is a period of time of defined duration, calculated in full years, 
months, weeks or days, by reference to a relevant event (J 18/04), within 
which an act vis-à-vis the EPO has to be completed. 
Some of these are fixed by the articles of the EPC, e.g. Art. 87(1) (priority 
period) and Art. 99(1) (opposition). Others are fixed in the Implementing 
Regulations, e.g. in Rule 30(3) (payment of late-furnishing fee), Rule 38 
(payment of filing and search fee), Rule 39(1) (payment of designation 
fees), Rule 58 (correction of deficiencies in application documents), 
Rule 70(1) (request for examination), Rule 71(3) (filing translations of the 
claims and payment of fees for grant and publishing) and Rule 112(2) 
(applying for a decision after notification of loss of rights). 
Others take the form of a stipulated range, the precise period within this 
range being at the EPO's discretion. 
In other cases, e.g. those dealt with in Rule 3(3) (filing translation of 
documentary evidence), or Rule 70(2) (invitation to applicants to indicate 
whether they desire to proceed further with the European patent 
application), a period, but not its duration, is provided for in the EPC. The 
duration must be specified by the EPO in accordance with Rule 132 
(see E-VIII, 1.2). 
1.2 Duration of the periods to be specified by the EPO on the basis 
of EPC provisions 
The length of such periods is based, in principle, on the amount of work 
which is likely to be required to perform the operation in question (minimum 
of two months, maximum of four months, exceptionally six months). 
However, in order to facilitate the work of parties and the EPO it has been 
decided, as a general rule, to adopt a uniform practice with respect to time 
limits. This practice is at present as follows: 
(i) 
if deficiencies to be corrected are merely formal or merely of a minor 
character; if simple acts only are requested, e.g. under Rule 83 the 
subsequent filing of documents referred to by a party; or if 
observations are required on amendments which are merely of a 
minor character – two months; 
(ii) 
communications from an examining or opposition division raising 
matters of substance – four months; 
(iii) 
communications from the Legal Division – two months. 
Art. 120 
Rule 131 
Part E – Chapter VIII-2 

 
 
Where a communication according to Art. 94(3) in examination is 
accompanied by a request for a translation of a priority document 
(Rule 53(3)), the period set for reply to that communication and for 
providing the translation is the same and is at least four months, regardless 
of the severity of the objections raised in the communication according to 
Art. 94(3) (see also A-III, 6.8.2). 
A longer time limit of up to six months is set only in the exceptional cases 
where it is clear that in the circumstances a four-month time limit cannot be 
adhered to. Each case must be judged on its individual merits and it is 
difficult to give general guidance, but a six-month time limit might be 
justified if for example the subject-matter of the application or patent or the 
objections raised are exceptionally complicated. Note that in this case an 
extension of the time limit (i.e. beyond six months) will be allowed only in 
exceptional cases (E-VIII, 1.6). Where the applicant is invited to submit the 
indication provided for in Rule 70(2), a six-month time limit running from the 
publication of the search report is appropriate. 
1.3 Time limits which may be freely determined 
Time limits for operations in respect of which the setting of a time limit is not 
explicitly provided for in the EPC are not subject to the restrictions as to the 
duration of time limits laid down in Rule 132. They may be fixed by the EPO 
at its own discretion. 
1.4 Calculation of time limits 
Although Rule 131 allows other possibilities, any period fixed by the EPO 
will usually be specified in full months which will be calculated from the date 
of notification (see E-II, 2). Rule 131 gives precise details for the 
determination of the day of expiry of the period, whilst Rule 134 contains 
provisions covering certain contingencies (see E-VIII, 1.6). 
When proceedings have been interrupted because of the death of the 
applicant or proprietor or for any of the other reasons specified in Rule 142 
(see E-VII, 1.1), time limits are subject to the provisions of Rule 142(4). The 
time limits for the payment of the examination fee and the renewal fees are 
suspended (see E-VII, 1.5). The time limits in force at the date of the stay of 
proceedings under Rule 14 due to national entitlement proceedings, with 
the exception of those for payment of the renewal fees, are interrupted. 
Rule 14(4) applies to the calculation of time limits after the resumption of 
proceedings (see A-IV, 2.2.4). 
1.5 Effect of change in priority date 
Certain time limits run from the date of priority, or in the case of multiple 
priorities, from the earliest date of priority. Where this date no longer 
applies (e.g. the right of priority is lost in accordance with the provisions of 
Art. 90(5)), any such time limits become determinable from the amended 
date of priority. This does not restore any loss of rights resulting from a time 
limit having already expired before the loss of priority date. For example, if 
a request for restoration of a priority right is filed upon entry into the 
European phase on expiry of the 31-month time limit under Rule 159(1) but 
the request is not granted resulting in the loss of the right of priority, the 31-
Rule 70(2) 
Rule 131 
Rule 134 
Rule 142 
Art. 88(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-3 
 
month time limit will not be deferred. Part A of the Guidelines deals with the 
procedure to be followed (see A-III, 6.9 to 6.11). 
1.6 Extension of a time limit 
1.6.1 Extension of time limits set by the EPO under Rule 132 
Other than in cases in respect of which the EPC specifies a fixed period 
which may not be extended, the duration of time limits may be extended on 
request. The request must be submitted in writing before expiry of the 
period that has been set. The extended period is to be calculated from the 
start of the original period. 
In opposition proceedings, requests to extend time limits over and above 
the normal period of four months, both for communications from an 
opposition division raising matters of substance and communications 
issued by the formalities officer, or two months for communications 
requesting an act of a merely formal or minor character (E-VIII, 1.2), will 
only be granted in exceptional, duly substantiated cases. For a 
communication under Art. 101(1) and Rule 79 or Rule 81(2) and 
Rule 81(3), all parties to the proceedings can request an extension 
irrespective of whether they were invited in the communication to reply: if 
the extension is, exceptionally, granted to one of the parties, it 
automatically applies to all other parties. 
In other proceedings, a request for extension, even if filed without reasons, 
is normally allowed if it is for not more than two months and the total period 
set does not thereby exceed six months. A request for a longer extension, 
especially if the total period set exceeds six months, is allowed only 
exceptionally, when the reasons given are sufficient to show convincingly 
that a reply in the period previously set will not be possible. Such 
exceptional circumstances might be e.g. the fact that representatives or 
clients are so seriously ill that they cannot deal with the case in time; or the 
need to perform extensive biological experiments or tests. On the other 
hand, foreseeable or avoidable circumstances (e.g. leave, pressure of other 
work) are not accepted as a sufficiently exceptional circumstance (see 
Notice of the Vice-President of Directorate-General 2 of the EPO, 
OJ EPO 1989, 180). 
If the request for an extension is granted, the parties are informed of the 
new time limit. Otherwise, they are told that the relevant sanction has taken 
effect or will take effect. 
An application will be removed from the PACE programme (see E-VIII, 4) if 
the 
applicant 
has 
requested 
an 
extension 
of 
a 
time 
limit 
(OJ EPO 2015, A93, point A.4). 
In examination proceedings, failure to respond to a communication 
according to Art. 94(3) results in deemed withdrawal of the application 
(see E-VIII, 1.8 and E-VIII, 1.9.2). 
If the request for extension of a time limit filed in good time has been 
rejected and any applicant considers this unjust, they can only overcome 
Rule 132 
Art. 106(2) 
Part E – Chapter VIII-4 

 
 
the ensuing loss of rights by requesting a decision under Rule 112(2) 
and/or further processing under Art. 121(1) and Rule 135(1) (see E-VIII, 2), 
as applicable. Where the reimbursement of the fee for further processing is 
requested and this is rejected, such decision is open to appeal, either 
together with the final decision or separately, as the case may be 
(see J 37/89). 
The failure of a party to reply to a communication from the opposition 
division within the period set does not lead directly to any legal 
consequence. Rather, the opposition proceedings will proceed to the next 
stage, and this could be a decision under Art. 101(2) or (3). 
1.6.2 Extension of periods under Rule 134 
1.6.2.1 Extension of periods under Rule 134(1) 
Periods that expire on a day on which at least one of the filing offices of the 
European Patent Office (i.e. Munich, The Hague or Berlin) is not open for 
receipt of documents (e.g. because a public holiday is observed at the 
location of the EPO's filing office) or on which mail is not delivered for other 
reasons (with the exception of a general dislocation in the transmission or 
delivery of mail, which is subject to the provision of Rule 134(2) – see 
E-VIII, 1.6.2.3) are extended to the first day thereafter on which all the filing 
offices are open again for receipt of documents and on which mail is 
delivered. 
An extension pursuant to Rule 134(1) also applies in the event that any one 
of the means of electronic filing provided by the EPO under Rule 2(1) is not 
available, regardless of any restrictions on the documents which may be 
filed by the means of electronic filing that suffered the outage. 
– 
If a means of electronic filing is unavailable for four hours or more 
because of scheduled maintenance, Rule 134(1), second sentence, 
applies. If the unavailability of a means of electronic filing lasts less 
than four hours and is announced at least two working days in 
advance, Rule 134(1), second sentence, does not apply. 
– 
In the case of unplanned outages, users who are unable to file a 
document should contact the EPO's Customer Services. If it is 
confirmed that the unavailability of the service is attributable to the 
EPO, said users will not suffer any adverse consequences; they may 
also request that the EPO declare under Rule 134(1), second 
sentence, that the missed period is extended to the date on which 
the document was filed. 
– 
If a payment period expires on a day on which one of the accepted 
means of making payment to the EPO for a Euro-direct or Euro-PCT 
application is unavailable, the payment period is extended to the first 
working day thereafter on which all such means of making payment 
are available unless the outage lasts less than four hours and is 
announced at least two working days in advance. 
For further details see OJ EPO 2020, A120. 
Rule 134(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-5 
 
1.6.2.2 Extension of periods under Rule 134(2) and Rule 134(5) 
Where there is a general dislocation in the delivery or transmission of mail 
in a contracting state, any period expiring during such dislocation is 
extended for parties who are resident in the state concerned or have 
appointed a representative with a place if business in that state. Where the 
state concerned is the state in which the EPO is located, the extension 
applies to all parties and representatives, irrespective of their residence. 
The beginning and the end of the period of such general dislocation is 
published in the Official Journal. 
Equally, where an individual party can provide evidence of a dislocation of 
the delivery or transmission of mail due to an exceptional occurrence inside 
or outside EPC contracting states (such as, in particular, a natural disaster, 
war, civil disorder or a general breakdown of any of the means of electronic 
communication accepted by the EPO for the filing of documents), a late 
submission or payment will be deemed to be received in due time, provided 
that 
– 
the dislocation affected the locality where that party or their 
representative resides or has their principal place of business, 
– 
the dislocation existed on any of the last ten days of the period at 
issue, and 
– 
the transmission or payment is effected within five days from the end 
of the dislocation, together with 
– 
a formal request of the party concerned under Rule 134(5), 
accompanied by appropriate evidence. 
1.6.2.3 Scope of application of Rule 134 
An extension under Rule 134 applies to all periods under the EPC (see 
E-VIII, 1.1), including, in particular: 
– 
the time limits for the filing of submissions, e.g. replies to EPO 
communications; 
– 
the time limit under Rule 37(2) for the onward transmission to the 
EPO of applications filed with the central industrial property office of 
a contracting state (see A-II, 1.6); 
– 
the priority period under Art. 87(1) (see A-III, 6.6); 
– 
the opposition period under Art. 99(1);  
– 
the period for entry into the European phase under Rule 159(1); 
– 
the periods for the payment of fees (see A-X, 6.1), including, mutatis 
mutandis, the expiry of the period to pay renewal fees with an 
additional fee in accordance with Rule 51(2) and the expiry of the 
periods under Rule 51(3) and (4) (see A-X, 5.2.4). 
Rule 134(2) and (4) 
Rule 134(5) 
Part E – Chapter VIII-6 

 
 
By contrast, an extension under Rule 134 does not affect: 
– 
the pendency of the earlier application when filing a divisional 
application (see A-IV, 1.1.1); 
– 
the beginning of the six-month period for the payment of a renewal 
fee with an additional fee under Rule 51(2) unless the due date for 
the renewal fee is deferred to the expiry of a period, for instance in 
the case of Rule 159(1)(g) (see A-X, 5.2.4); 
– 
the due date for the renewal fees for a divisional application and the 
beginning of the four-month period under Rule 51(3) (see 
A-IV, 1.4.3);  
– 
the date of the start of the search, which is relevant for the 
entitlement to a refund of the search fee (see A-X, 10.2.1);  
– 
the date of the start of substantive examination, which is relevant for 
filing a PPH request (see E-VIII, 4.3) or the entitlement to a refund of 
the examination fee (see A-VI, 2.5); 
– 
the date on which a request under Rule 22 (registration of transfers) 
or Rule 54 (certified priority document) is deemed to be filed, where 
the payment date is decisive, because these requests are deemed to 
have been filed only when the corresponding administrative fee has 
been paid. 
The extension equally does not affect the final date for making written 
submissions in preparation for oral proceedings under Rule 116, strictly 
speaking. However, a general dislocation in the delivery of mail or other 
exceptional occurrence under Rule 134(5) will be taken into account by an 
examining or opposition division in exercising its discretion whether to 
admit submissions filed after the date set under Rule 116 (see E-III, 8.5, 
sub-item (iv)). Given that the date fixed under Rule 116 is meant to ensure 
adequate preparation of the oral proceedings, a party making submissions 
after that date must show that it has taken reasonable efforts to do so as 
early as reasonably possible. 
1.7 Late receipt of documents 
If a document received late was delivered to a recognised postal service 
provider at least five days before expiry of the time limit and was received 
no later than three months after expiry of the time limit, it will be deemed to 
have been received in due time under Rule 133. The five days are calendar 
days, not working days. This legal fiction applies to all time limits to be 
observed vis-à-vis the EPO and/or the national authorities, including the 
priority period laid down in Art. 87(1). Despite this legal fiction that the time 
limit has been observed, the filing date of the document remains the day on 
which it was actually received. 
Recognised postal service providers are the designated operators within 
the meaning of Article 1 of the Universal Postal Convention as well as 
Chronopost, DHL, Federal Express, flexpress, TNT, SkyNet, UPS and 
Rule 133(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-7 
 
Transworld (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
11 March 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A29). The document must have been sent 
as a registered letter or equivalent and, if posted outside Europe, by 
airmail. At the request of the EPO, confirmation of receipt by the postal 
service provider must be provided as evidence that the document was 
delivered in due time. 
1.8 Failure to respond within a time limit 
If a party has not acted within a time limit, various sanctions may be applied 
depending on the circumstances. For instance, under Art. 90(2) and 
Rule 55 the application will not be proceeded with; under Art. 90(5) the 
application will be refused or a right of priority lost; under Rule 5 a 
document may be deemed not to have been received. If the request for 
examination has not been filed in time, the application is deemed to be 
withdrawn (Art. 94(2)), and this sanction may also apply in those cases 
where the applicant fails to meet a time limit set by the EPO (e.g. the time 
limit for replying to an invitation to amend under Art. 94(3)). 
If a particular time limit is not complied with and, in contrast to cases where 
mandatory legal sanctions are laid down (e.g. revocation of the European 
patent if the publishing fee is not paid in due time (Rule 82(3)), no specific 
legal sanction is laid down in the EPC, submissions and requests from the 
parties made after expiry of the time limit but before a decision is handed 
over to the EPO's internal postal service for transmittal to the parties are to 
be regarded in the rest of the proceedings as if they had been received in 
time (see G 12/91); any facts or evidence are, however, to be treated as 
not filed in due time (Art. 114(2), see also E-VI, 1.2). 
1.9 Loss of rights 
1.9.1 Cases of loss of rights 
If a party to the proceedings or a third party fails to comply with a time limit 
laid down in the EPC or fixed by the EPO, this will result in a loss of rights 
in certain cases specified in the EPC, without any decision concerning the 
refusal of the European patent application or the grant, revocation or 
maintenance of the European patent, or the taking of evidence. 
1.9.2 Noting and communication of loss of rights 
If there has been a loss of any right as described in E-VIII, 1.9.1, a 
formalities officer will note such loss of rights and communicate this to the 
person concerned. The communication will be notified to the person 
concerned as a matter of course (see also D-IV, 1.4.1). 
1.9.3 Decision on loss of rights 
If the party concerned considers that the finding of the EPO is inaccurate, 
they may, within two months after notification of the communication, apply 
for a decision on the matter by the EPO. 
The competent department of the EPO will give such a decision only if it 
does not share the opinion of the person requesting it; otherwise it will 
inform the person requesting the decision and then continue with the 
proceedings. Since such decisions are subject to appeal, the reasons on 
Rule 112 
Art. 119 
Rule 112(1) 
Rule 112(2) 
Part E – Chapter VIII-8 

 
 
which they are based must be stated. Only the person affected by the loss 
of rights noted will be party to the proceedings. 
The request under Rule 112(2) for a review of the accuracy of the 
communication under Rule 112(1) exists in parallel to the legal remedies 
against the loss of rights. It is advisable to apply for the appropriate legal 
remedy as an auxiliary request to that under Rule 112(2) in order to 
observe the relevant time limit for that request (see E-VIII, 2 and 
E-VIII, 3.1.3). The competent department will deal with the request under 
Rule 112(2) first. If it is allowable, all other requests are redundant and any 
related fees paid will be refunded. If it is not allowable, one decision will 
deal with the various requests in the order in which they were filed. If 
applicants fail to observe the time limit for requesting a decision under 
Rule 112(2), they may still apply for re-establishment of rights under 
Art. 122(1) and Rule 136(1) in respect of that time limit. 
2. 
Further processing 
If the European patent application is to be refused or is refused or deemed 
to be withdrawn following failure to reply within a time limit vis-à-vis the 
EPO, the application is allowed to proceed if the applicant makes a request 
for further processing of the application within two months of the 
communication concerning either the failure to observe a time limit or a loss 
of rights. Further processing must be requested by payment of the 
prescribed fee. The omitted act must be completed within the period for 
making the request. The request is not deemed to have been filed until the 
respective fee for further processing has been paid. If the fee for further 
processing has been paid in due time but the omitted act has not been 
completed within the period for making the request, the request is 
inadmissible. 
If several acts have the same legal basis, they form a unitary procedural act 
and are subject to a unitary time limit (see J 26/95). Further processing in 
respect of such a time limit is subject to the payment of a single fee for 
further processing. The amount of the single fee depends on the number 
and character of the omitted acts forming the unitary procedural act. 
The following examples serve to illustrate this: 
– 
Requesting examination under Art. 94(1) in conjunction with 
Rule 70(1) requires filing a written request for examination and 
paying the examination fee. As both actions have the same legal 
basis, they form a unitary procedural act subject to a unitary time 
limit. If both actions were omitted, the single fee for further 
processing amounts to the sum of the flat fee and 50% of the 
examination fee (Art. 2(1), item 12, first and third indents, RFees). If 
only the examination fee was not paid in due time, the fee for further 
processing amounts to 50% of the examination fee (Art. 2(1), 
item 12, first indent, RFees). If only the written request for 
examination was omitted, the fee for further processing amounts to 
the flat fee (Art. 2(1), item 12, third indent, RFees). 
Art. 121(1) and (2) 
Rule 135(1) and (3) 
Art. 2(1), 
item 12, RFees 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-9 
 
– 
The filing fee and the additional fee due if the application comprises 
more than 35 pages must be paid within the time limit set by 
Rule 38(1) and (2). As the additional fee is part of the filing fee, the 
payment of these two fees forms a unitary procedural act subject to a 
unitary time limit. Hence, one fee for further processing is due. If both 
fees were not paid in due time, the single fee for further processing 
comprises 50% of the filing fee and 50% of the additional fee (see 
Art. 2(1), item 12, first indent, RFees). If only one fee was not paid in 
due time, the single fee for further processing amounts to 50% of that 
omitted fee (see Art. 2(1), item 12, first indent, RFees). 
An exception to the above principle concerns Rule 71(3): 
– 
Approval of the text communicated under Rule 71(3) requires paying 
the fee for grant and publishing and, where applicable, claims fees 
(Rule 71(4)) and filing the translations of the claims within a 
four-month period (Rule 71(5)). As these actions have the same legal 
basis, they form a unitary procedural act subject to a unitary time 
limit. By way of exception to the principle that the single fee for 
further processing is computed on the basis of the number of omitted 
acts, Art. 2(1), item 12, second indent, RFees stipulates that only one 
flat fee for further processing is due in the event of late performance 
of any or all of the acts required under Rule 71(3), i.e. paying the fee 
for grant and publishing and filing the translations of the claims. If in 
addition claims fees were not paid in due time, the single fee for 
further processing amounts to the sum of the flat fee and 50% of the 
claims fees (see Art. 2(1), item 12, second and first indent, RFees). If 
only the claims fees were not paid in due time, the single fee for 
further processing amounts to 50% of the claims fees (Art. 2(1), 
item 12, first indent, RFees). For European patent applications filed 
before 1 April 2009 and international applications entering the 
European phase before that date, any page fees under Art. 2(2), 
item 7.2, RFees are part of the fee for grant and printing. Therefore, if 
only page fees were not paid in due time, the fee for further 
processing amounts to the flat fee (Art. 2(1), item 12, second indent, 
RFees). 
Actions not forming a unitary procedural act are subject to time limits 
expiring independently of one another, each resulting in the application 
being deemed withdrawn. If such time limits expire on the same date, the 
missing of each independent time limit results in the application being 
deemed withdrawn (see J 26/95). This applies regardless of whether the 
applicant is informed of the non-performance of procedural acts in one 
communication or in several communications. In such cases, a fee for 
further processing is due in respect of each unobserved time limit. For an 
example, see E-VIII, 3.1.3. 
A request for further processing may also be filed between expiry of the 
unobserved time limit and notification of the communication concerning 
either the failure to observe a time limit or a loss of rights. 
Part E – Chapter VIII-10 

 
 
The department competent to decide on the omitted act also decides on the 
request for further processing. 
Where the omitted act is a substantive response (e.g. to the extended 
European search report or to a communication under Art. 94(3)), a mere 
procedural request (e.g. a request for oral proceedings) does not qualify as 
completion of the omitted act and therefore cannot lead to further 
processing being granted (see B-XI, 8 and C-IV, 3). 
As a general rule, further processing is the legal remedy for failure to 
observe a time limit during proceedings before grant, even where the 
consequence is a partial loss of rights (e.g. loss of priority right). However, 
the possibility of requesting further processing is ruled out for the periods 
referred to in Art. 121(4) and Rules 6(1), 16(1)(a), 31(2), 36(2), 40(3), 51(2) 
to (5), 52(2) and (3), 55, 56, 56a(1) and (3) to (7), 58, 59, 62a, 63, 64, 
112(2) and 164(1) and (2). 
3. 
Re-establishment of rights 
An applicant for or proprietor of a European patent who, despite taking all 
due care required by the circumstances, was unable to observe a time limit 
vis-à-vis the EPO may apply to have their rights re-established. 
3.1 Admissibility of the request 
3.1.1 Time limits covered 
Failure to observe the time limit must have the direct consequence of 
causing the refusal of the European patent application or of a request, or 
the deeming of the European patent application to have been withdrawn, or 
the revocation of the European patent, or the loss of any other right or 
means of redress. This means, for example, that in opposition proceedings 
there can be no re-establishment of rights in respect of the time limits for 
the patent proprietor's submission of observations on the written statements 
of the other parties to the proceedings or on communications from the 
opposition division. Likewise, there can be no re-establishment of rights in 
case of failure to observe the time limit for the payment of the renewal fees 
under Rule 51(1) as valid payment is still possible under Rule 51(2). 
Re-establishment of rights is ruled out in respect of all periods for which 
further processing is available and in respect of the period for requesting 
re-establishment of rights. This means that re-establishment of rights 
comes into play where further processing is excluded in respect of a 
specific period or where the time limit for requesting further processing has 
expired. In the latter case, re-establishment of rights in respect of the time 
limit for requesting further processing is to be requested (see E-VIII, 2), and 
not in respect of the originally missed time limit. 
A "time limit" is taken to mean a specific period of time within which an act 
vis-à-vis the EPO must be completed (see E-VIII, 1.1). Re-establishment of 
rights is therefore not admissible e.g. in respect of failure to be present on 
the date of appointed oral proceedings. 
Rule 135(2) 
Art. 122(1) 
Art. 122(1) 
Art. 122(4) 
Rule 136(3) 
Rule 131(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-11 
 
The following are examples of cases where re-establishment of rights may 
be requested. They concern the time limits for: 
– 
payment of a renewal fee plus additional fee; 
– 
requesting further processing in respect of the time limit for replying 
to a communication from the examining division under Art. 94(3); 
– 
filing the translation of any amended claims in opposition 
proceedings; 
– 
filing the request for a decision by the opposition division on the 
awarding of costs; 
– 
filing notice of appeal and/or grounds of appeal; and 
– 
filing a petition for review by the Enlarged Board of Appeal. 
3.1.2 Entitlement to file the request 
The wording of Art. 122(1) implies that re-establishment of rights is 
available only to applicants and proprietors. Therefore, opponents are in 
principle not entitled to request re-establishment of rights, e.g. in respect of 
the time limit for filing an appeal (see T 210/89). However, an opponent 
who has filed an appeal can request re-establishment of rights in respect of 
the time limit for submitting the grounds for appeal (see G 1/86). 
Where re-establishment of rights is requested by the patent proprietor in 
respect of a time limit connected with the opposition procedure, the 
opponents are party to the re-establishment proceedings (see T 552/02 and 
T 1561/05). 
In the case of transfer of an application or patent, the request for 
re-establishment of rights may only be filed by the registered applicant 
(E-XIV, 3). 
3.1.3 Form of the request and applicable time limit 
As a rule, the request for re-establishment of rights must be filed in writing 
within two months from the removal of the cause of non-compliance with 
the time limit, but at the latest within one year of expiry of the unobserved 
time limit. The omitted act must be completed within this period. 
Where the "cause of non-compliance with the time limit" involved some 
error in the carrying out of the party's intention to comply with the time limit, 
the removal of the cause of non-compliance occurs on the date on which 
the person responsible for the application is made aware of the fact that a 
time limit has not been observed or ought to have noticed the error if all due 
care had been taken. The removal of the cause of non-compliance is a 
matter of fact which has to be determined in the circumstances of each 
individual case. In the absence of circumstances to the contrary, where a 
communication under Rule 112(1) has been duly sent, it may be assumed 
that the removal was effected by receipt of this communication 
(see J 27/90). 
Rule 51(2) 
Rule 135(1) 
Rule 82(2) 
Rule 88(3) 
Art. 108 
Art. 112a(4) 
Rule 22(3) 
Rule 136(1), (2) 
Part E – Chapter VIII-12 

 
 
Unlike the time limit for other cases as described above, a request for 
re-establishment in respect of the priority period (Art. 87(1)) or the period 
for filing a petition for review by the Enlarged Board of Appeal (Art. 112a(4)) 
must be filed within two months of expiry of the relevant period. 
A request for re-establishment is not deemed to be filed until after the fee 
for the re-establishment of rights has been paid. 
The principles regarding unitary and independent procedural acts described 
in E-VIII, 2 apply mutatis mutandis to establishing the number of requests 
for re-establishment of rights, in particular for establishing the relevant fees 
to be paid. Where one unitary procedural act is omitted by not performing 
one or more actions forming that act, only one fee for re-establishment is 
due. Where several independent procedural acts are omitted, each 
resulting in the application being deemed withdrawn, a fee for 
re-establishment is due for each omitted act. 
These principles also apply to cases where re-establishment of rights must 
be requested in respect of the time limit(s) for requesting further processing 
(see Rule 136(3)). In such cases, the number of unobserved time limits, 
each resulting in the application being deemed withdrawn and requiring a 
request for further processing, determines the number of requests for 
re-establishment 
and 
the 
corresponding 
number 
of 
fees 
for 
re-establishment. 
Example 1 
An international application comprises more than 35 pages and was 
published in a language other than an official language of the EPO. The 
acts required for entry into the European phase upon expiry of the 
31-month period under Rule 159(1) were omitted. Due to their different 
legal nature, the individual acts required under Rule 159(1) do not form a 
unitary procedural step but are legally independent and subject to 
independent time limits. The table below provides a schematic illustration 
regarding further processing and re-establishment of rights (for information 
on the remedies available for non-observance of the time limits under 
Rule 159(1), see the individual sections under E-IX, 2). 
Box I of the table lists the number of independent unobserved time limits. 
Box II indicates the fee for further processing corresponding to each 
unobserved time limit. Box III provides the fee for re-establishment 
corresponding to each unobserved time limit. 
In the example, for a request for further processing to be allowed, 
completion of the omitted acts (i.e. all acts that were to be performed within 
the 31-month period) and payment of five fees for further processing (two of 
which comprise two fees) are required within the two-month period under 
Rule 135(1). If that period is missed, the applicant may request 
re-establishment of rights in respect of the period. The request requires 
completion of the omitted acts and payment of the corresponding number 
of fees for re-establishment of rights within the period under Rule 136(1). 
The omitted acts are those that were to be performed within the 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-13 
 
31-month period and payment of the corresponding five fees for further 
processing. Payment of five fees for re-establishment of rights corresponds 
to the number of five independent fees for further processing. 
Omitted acts 
Time limits 
missed 
(box I) 
Number of fees 
for further 
processing 
(box II) 
Number of 
fees for re-
establishment 
(box III) 
 
Filing of the translation 
 
1 
1 
1 
Payment of the filing 
fee 
 
1 (unitary) 
1 (comprising 
50% of the filing 
fee and 50% of 
the additional 
fee) 
1 
Payment of the 
additional fee for an 
application comprising 
more than 35 pages 
 
Payment of the 
designation fee 
 
1 
1 
1 
Payment of the search 
fee 
 
1 
1 
1 
Filing of the request for 
examination 
 
1 (unitary) 
1 (comprising a 
flat fee and 50% 
of the 
examination fee) 
1 
Payment of the 
examination fee 
 
Resulting number of 
fees to be paid 
 
5 non-
observed 
time limits 
5 fees for further 
processing, 2 of 
them comprising 
2 fees 
 
5 fees for re-
establishment  
Example 2 
The applicant missed the time limit for requesting further processing in 
respect of the time limit for replying to a communication from the examining 
division under Art. 94(3) as well as the time limit to pay the renewal fee with 
the additional fee. As these time limits expire independently of one another 
and both have been missed by the applicant, each resulting in the 
application being deemed withdrawn, a request for re-establishment has to 
be filed in respect of each unobserved time limit (J 26/95). In such cases, a 
fee for re-establishment has to be paid in respect of each request. In the 
case of independent time limits, in particular where they expire on different 
dates, the reasons for missing them and the date of removal of the cause of 
non-compliance may be different. 
Example 3 
After a decision to refuse by the examining division, the applicant missed 
both the time limit for filing the notice and the time limit for filing the 
Part E – Chapter VIII-14 

 
 
statement of grounds of appeal. Both time limits were missed for the same 
reason. Despite two time limits being missed, only one re-establishment fee 
has to be paid as both periods were triggered by the same event, i.e. the 
notification of the decision, and both time limits were missed on the same 
grounds. In such a case, re-establishment in respect of both periods has to 
be examined together and, as the result would inevitably be the same in 
both cases, one re-establishment fee is considered to be sufficient. 
If the time limits for filing the notice and the grounds were missed for 
different reasons, there would be no causal connection and two fees for 
re-establishment would have to be paid. 
3.1.4 Substantiation of the request 
The request must state the grounds on which it is based, and must set out 
the facts on which it relies. Thus, it must set forth the precise cause of 
non-compliance with the time limit concerned (i.e. the fact or obstacle 
preventing the required action within the time limit), specify at what time 
and under which circumstances the cause occurred and was removed, and 
present the core facts making it possible to consider whether all due care 
required by the circumstances had been taken in order to comply with the 
time limit concerned (see J 15/10). General statements with no indication of 
the concrete facts or events that caused the time limit to be missed do not 
satisfy the requirement for a duly substantiated request under Rule 136(2). 
Once the time limit for filing the request for re-establishment has expired, 
the requester may clarify or supplement the alleged facts and, where 
appropriate, submit further evidence. However, the requester cannot alter 
the factual basis on which the original request for re-establishment had 
been based (see J 5/94). Any new facts introduced at this stage are not 
admissible and are, therefore, not taken into consideration by the deciding 
instance. 
3.2 Merit of the request 
Applicants can have their rights re-established only if they show that they 
were unable to observe a time limit vis-à-vis the EPO in spite of all due care 
required by the circumstances having been taken. The obligation to 
exercise due care must be considered in the light of the situation as it stood 
before the missed time limit expired. "All due care" means all reasonable 
care, i.e. the standard of care that the notional reasonably competent 
patentee, applicant or representative would employ in all the relevant 
circumstances (see T 30/90). 
For cases where the cause of non-compliance with a time limit involves 
some error in the carrying out of the party's intention to comply with the 
time limit, all due care is considered to have been taken if non-compliance 
with the time limit results either from exceptional circumstances or from an 
isolated mistake within a normally satisfactory monitoring system. 
A finding of exceptional circumstances justifying the re-establishment of 
rights is dependent on the individual facts of the case. Examples include 
inter alia organisational upheavals and sudden serious illnesses. In such 
cases, the requesters must show not only the existence of those 
Art. 122(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-15 
 
circumstances, but also that they took all due care, e.g. by carefully 
preparing the reorganisation or by having an effective staff substitution 
system. 
Where an isolated mistake within a normally satisfactory monitoring system 
is alleged, the relevant party must show that the monitoring system 
normally works well. Such a system must include an independent, effective 
cross-check mechanism. However, this requirement does not apply to 
relatively small entities/patent departments (see T 166/87 and J 11/03). 
The duty to exercise all due care applies first and foremost to the applicants 
and then, by virtue of delegation, to the representative duly entrusted by the 
applicant to act on their behalf in prosecuting the application (see J 3/93). 
The obligations of the applicant and those of their representative are clearly 
distinct and depend on the relationship between them (see T 112/89 and 
J 19/04). In this regard, the scope of the mandate and any express 
instructions given to the representative are taken into account. 
Applicants are entitled to rely on their representative. To the extent that 
applicants are on notice that instructions are required in order to meet a 
time limit, they have however a duty to take all due care in the 
circumstances to meet the time limit (see T 381/93). The fact that the 
professional representative has acted correctly does not exempt applicants 
from suffering the consequences of their own mistakes or negligence. 
European representatives are responsible in the procedure before the EPO 
and must be presumed to be supervising their own work continuously (see 
T 1095/06). When professional representatives have been instructed by 
their client to perform a particular procedural action and do not receive in 
due time the necessary additional instructions or required means, they 
must in principle take all necessary measures to try to obtain these 
instructions from their client and ascertain their true wishes (see T 112/89 
and J 19/04). 
Professional representatives can delegate routine tasks, such as typing, 
posting letters, noting time limits or checking due dates, to assistants. In 
those cases, the same strict standard of care is not expected of the 
assistant as is demanded of the representative himself. The representative 
must however show that the assistants have been carefully selected, duly 
instructed and periodically supervised (see J 5/80 and T 439/06). 
If the applicants entrust a further party with taking care of their application 
matters, e.g. a non-European representative or a fee payment agency, it 
has to be established that such a party has taken the due care required of 
an applicant for or proprietor of a European patent (see J 3/88). In 
particular, a non-European representative must also show that a reliable 
system for the monitoring of time limits was in place when the time limit was 
missed (see J 4/07). 
3.3 Decision on re-establishment of rights 
The department competent to decide on the omitted act is also competent 
to decide on the request for re-establishment of rights. The grounds for the 
Rule 136(4) 
Part E – Chapter VIII-16 

 
 
decision need only be stated if the request is not granted, except in 
opposition proceedings, as opponents are party to the re-establishment 
proceedings (see E-VIII, 3.1.2). 
The department which took the contested decision will have to consider 
re-establishment of rights in respect of an unobserved time limit for appeal 
when the conditions for granting interlocutory revision are fulfilled 
(see E-XII, 7). It can, however, only decide to allow re-establishment if it 
can do so within the three-month time limit of Art. 109(2) and the conditions 
for re-establishment (see E-VIII, 3.1.1 to E-VIII, 3.1.4) are fulfilled. In all 
other cases, the appeal, together with the application for the 
re-establishment of rights, must be submitted to the competent board of 
appeal. 
If the request is granted, the legal consequences of the failure to observe 
the time limit will be deemed not to have ensued. Any renewal fees which 
may have fallen due between the expiry of the missed time limit and the 
notification of the decision to grant the request for re-establishment will be 
due on that latter date. Valid payment will still be possible within four 
months of that date. If a renewal fee was already due when the loss of 
rights occurred but could still be paid under Rule 51(2), it may still be paid 
within six months of the date of notification of the decision re-establishing 
the rights, provided that the additional fee is also paid within that period. 
If other time limits the non-observance of which would also lead to a loss of 
rights were already running when the loss of rights occurred, on granting 
the request for re-establishment the EPO will send the applicant a 
communication triggering those time limits anew. 
4. 
Accelerated prosecution of European patent applications 
Applicants requiring faster search or examination can ask to have their 
applications processed under the programme for accelerated prosecution 
of European patent applications (PACE) (see the notice from the EPO 
dated 30 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A93; for PACE requests filed 
before 1 January 2016 see also OJ EPO 2010, 352). For information 
regarding additional ways to expedite the European grant procedure see 
OJ EPO 2015, A94). 
Requests for participation in the PACE programme (PACE requests) must 
be filed online using the dedicated request form (EPO Form 1005). The 
EPO will issue an acknowledgement of receipt promptly. Requests filed 
informally, i.e. without using the dedicated form, and/or on paper will not be 
processed by the EPO. 
A PACE request may be filed only once during each stage of the 
procedure, i.e. search and examination, and for one application at a time. A 
PACE request filed during search will not trigger accelerated examination. If 
the applicant wishes to have the application examined in an accelerated 
manner, a PACE request may be filed, once the application has entered the 
examination phase. 
Art. 122(3) 
Rule 51(4) 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-17 
 
The EPO does not publish requests for accelerated search and/or 
examination and, by decision of the President dated 12 July 2007 (Special 
edition No. 3, OJ EPO 2007, J.3), they are excluded from file inspection. 
An application will be taken out of the PACE programme if: 
– 
the PACE request has been withdrawn, 
– 
the applicant has requested an extension of time limits, 
– 
the application has been refused, 
– 
the application has been withdrawn, 
– 
the application is deemed to be withdrawn. 
This applies regardless of the legal remedies available under the EPC. In 
such cases it will not be possible to restore the application to the PACE 
programme, i.e. a second request for that application during the same 
stage of the procedure will not be processed. 
Additionally, accelerated prosecution will be suspended in the event of 
failure to pay renewal fees by the due date stipulated in Rule 51(1). 
Accelerated prosecution under the PACE programme can be provided only 
where practically feasible and subject to the workload of the search and 
examining divisions. In certain technical fields there may be constraints due 
to the numbers of incoming PACE requests. Applicants requesting 
accelerated prosecution for all or most of their applications will, as a rule, 
be required by the EPO to limit the number of their PACE requests by 
making a selection. 
4.1 Accelerated search 
For European patent applications filed on or after 1 July 2014 (including 
PCT applications entering the European phase where the EPO did not act 
as (S)ISA) the EPO strives to issue the extended/partial European search 
report within six months from the filing date or from expiry of the period 
under Rule 161(2). Hence, no PACE request is needed. 
For European patent applications (including PCT applications entering the 
European phase where the EPO did not act as (S)ISA) which were filed 
before 1 July 2014 and which do claim priority (second filings), on receipt of 
a PACE request the EPO makes every effort to issue the extended/partial 
European search report within six months from receipt of the request. 
Without prejudice to the above an accelerated search can only start: 
(i) 
after receipt of the applicant's response to a communication under 
Rule 62a or 63, or expiry of the respective time limit; 
(ii) 
in all cases: when the application documents on filing are complete 
enough for the extended search report to be drawn up. That means, 
Part E – Chapter VIII-18 

 
 
in particular, that the accelerated search can only start once the 
claims, the description, the translations required and, where 
applicable, the drawings and a sequence listing conforming to the 
rules for the standardised representation of nucleotide or amino acid 
sequences have been filed; 
(iii) 
for PCT applications entering the European phase where the EPO 
did not act as (S)ISA: after expiry of the six-month period under 
Rule 161(2), even if acceleration has been requested under the 
PACE programme. In order for the supplementary European search 
to start immediately, on entry into the European phase the applicant 
must explicitly waive the right to communications pursuant to 
Rules 161(2) and 162(2) and pay any claims fees due (see the notice 
from the EPO dated 30 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A93). 
If the EPO has invited the applicant to pay further search fee(s) under 
Rule 64(1), second sentence, or 164(1)(b), the final search report under 
Rule 64(1), last sentence, or 164(1)(c) cannot be drawn up until the 
applicant's response to the invitation to pay further search fee(s) has been 
received or until the respective time limit has expired. 
4.2 Accelerated examination 
Accelerated examination can, in principle, be requested at any time after 
the examining division has assumed responsibility for the application 
(Rule 10(2), (3)). 
For PCT applications entering the European phase where the EPO also 
acted as (S)ISA, accelerated examination can, in principle, be requested at 
any time, for example 
– 
on entry into the European phase before the EPO, or 
– 
together with any response to the WO-ISA, IPER or SISR required 
under Rule 161(1). 
When accelerated examination is requested, the EPO makes every effort to 
issue the next office action within three months of receipt by the examining 
division of the application, the applicant's response under Rule 70a or the 
end of the period under Rule 161(1), or the request for accelerated 
examination (whichever is later). 
In particular for PCT applications entering the European phase where the 
EPO acted as (S)ISA, accelerated examination can only start after expiry of 
the six-month period under Rule 161(1), even if acceleration has been 
requested under the PACE programme. In order for examination to start 
immediately, on entry into the European phase the applicant must explicitly 
waive the right to the communication pursuant to Rule 161(1) and 
Rule 162(2) and fulfil all corresponding requirements (see the notice from 
the EPO dated 30 November 2015, OJ EPO 2015, A94). 
The EPO strives to produce subsequent examination communications 
within three months of receipt of the applicant's reply, provided that the 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-19 
 
application is still being processed under the PACE programme 
(see E-VIII, 4). 
4.3 Patent Prosecution Highway (PPH) 
The Patent Prosecution Highway (PPH) enables an applicant whose claims 
have been determined to be allowable to have a corresponding application 
which has been filed with a PPH partner office processed in an accelerated 
manner while at the same time allowing the offices involved to exploit 
available work results. A request before the EPO must be filed before 
substantive examination has begun. 
A PPH request can be based on: 
(i) 
the latest PCT work product (WO-ISA or IPRP/IPER) established by 
one of the PPH partner offices as ISA or IPEA (PPH based on PCT 
work products); or 
(ii) 
any national work product (office action indicating allowable claims) 
established during the processing of a national application or of a 
PCT application that has entered the national phase before one of 
the PPH partner offices (PPH based on national work products). 
Currently, the EPO's PPH partner offices are: JPO (Japan), KIPO (South 
Korea), CNIPA (China), USPTO (USA), ILPO (Israel), CIPO (Canada), IMPI 
(Mexico), IPOS (Singapore), IPA (Australia), SIC (Colombia), MyIPO 
(Malaysia), IPOPHL (Philippines), INPI (Brazil), INDECOPI (Peru) and 
SAIP (Saudi Arabia). The PPH programmes with ROSPATENT (Russian 
Federation) and EAPO (Eurasia) have been suspended. 
5. Accelerated processing of oppositions 
In cases where an infringement action in respect of a European patent is 
pending before the Unified Patent Court or a national court of a contracting 
state, a party to the opposition proceedings may request accelerated 
processing. The request may be filed at any time. It must be filed in written 
reasoned form. In addition, the EPO will also accelerate the processing of 
the opposition if it is informed by the Unified Patent Court, the national court 
or the competent authority of a contracting state that infringement or 
revocation actions are pending (D-VII, 1.2 and OJ EPO 2023, A99). 
6. Accelerated processing before the boards of appeal 
Parties with a legitimate interest may ask the boards of appeal to deal with 
their appeals rapidly. This option is also available to the courts and 
competent authorities of the contracting states (see Art. 10 Rules of 
Procedure of the Boards of Appeal, OJ EPO 2019, A63, as amended by 
OJ EPO 2021, A19). 
7. Enquiries 
In specific cases, parties to proceedings before the EPO may have an 
interest in enquiring about the progress of the file and thus obtaining 
information on when the next Office action is to be expected. A specific 
procedure for enquiries is available to all parties to proceedings before the 
EPO's departments of first instance, and applies to enquiries filed on or 
OJ EPO 2022, A44 
OJ EPO 2022, A45 
OJ EPO 2022, A58 
OJ EPO 2022, A59 
Part E – Chapter VIII-20 

 
 
after 1 November 2016 (see the notice from the EPO dated 2 August 2016, 
OJ EPO 2016, A66). 
Under this procedure, an enquiry is processed and replied to only if it is 
filed online using EPO Form 1012. It may be submitted for only one 
application or patent at a time. The EPO will promptly issue an 
acknowledgement of receipt. Both the enquiries and the replies from the 
EPO form integral parts of the file and, as such, are open to file inspection. 
Specific parameters may have an impact on the handling time for enquiries. 
For example, the non-payment of the renewal fee by the due date under 
Rule 51(1) may delay the EPO's handling of an enquiry. 
In general, the EPO will reply to enquiries by indicating the period within 
which the next Office action may be expected, taking into account the 
workload in the technical area concerned and the internal deadline for the 
completion of the pending action. 
Nevertheless, in the following cases an enquiry will automatically cause the 
EPO to issue the next action within one month from receipt of the enquiry: 
– 
where the extended/partial European search report in respect of 
European patent applications filed on or after 1 June 2014 (including 
international applications entering the European phase where the 
EPO did not act as (S)ISA) has not been issued within six months 
from the filing date or from expiry of the period under Rule 161(2); or 
– 
where an Office action in respect of an application which is being 
processed under the PACE programme or for which a previous 
enquiry has been made has not been performed within the 
committed period; 
and within six months from receipt of the enquiry: 
– 
where the extended/partial European search report in respect of 
European patent applications (including PCT applications entering 
the European phase where the EPO did not act as (S)ISA) filed 
before 1 June 2014 and which do claim priority (second filings) has 
not been issued. 
Unlike the PACE programme, the filing of enquiries does not imply a 
general acceleration of the prosecution of European patent applications. 
Prosecution of the application can be accelerated by separately requesting 
application of the PACE programme (see E-VIII, 4). 
8. 
Renunciation of rights 
8.1 Withdrawal of application or designation 
Applicants may withdraw their application at any time as long as the 
application is pending, provided that no third parties have proven to the 
EPO that they have initiated proceedings concerning entitlement to the 
Rule 15 
 

Part E – Chapter VIII-21 
 
application pursuant to Rule 14. With regard to the pendency of an 
application, see A-IV, 1.1.1. 
The same applies to the withdrawal of a designation (see also A-III, 11.3.8). 
If all designations are withdrawn, the application is deemed to be 
withdrawn. 
Withdrawal of the application in due time before the eighteen-month 
publication has the advantage that the contents of the application do not 
become known to the public (see A-VI, 1.2). If, furthermore, no rights have 
been left outstanding and the application has not served as a basis for 
claiming a right of priority, a subsequent application for the same invention 
can be considered as the first application for the purposes of determining 
priority (see F-VI, 1.4.1). If the examination fee has been paid, it will be 
refunded in full or in part (see A-VI, 2.5). 
Where a patent application has been refused, proceedings are still pending 
until expiry of the period for filing an appeal. On the day after, proceedings 
are no longer pending if no appeal is filed. Therefore, an application which 
is refused either in written or oral proceedings can still be withdrawn in this 
period. 
8.2 Withdrawal of priority claim 
The priority claim may also be withdrawn (see F-VI, 3.5). If this is done 
before the technical preparations for publication of the application are 
completed, the publication will be deferred until eighteen months after the 
date of filing of the European application or, where multiple priorities are 
claimed, the earliest priority date remaining (see A-VI, 1.1 and A-III, 6.3). 
8.3 Statement of withdrawal 
Any statement of withdrawal must be unqualified and unambiguous. It may, 
however, be conditional upon, e.g. avoidance of publication or refund of the 
examination fee. An unqualified and unambiguous withdrawal becomes 
effective the day it has been received by the EPO. 
If such a statement of withdrawal is made orally during oral proceedings, 
then either a (handwritten) signed confirmation is to be submitted during the 
proceedings or the division has to confirm the withdrawal in the minutes 
and read out the corresponding passage for confirmation in the oral 
proceedings. The withdrawal has effect from the date of the oral 
proceedings. 
8.4 Surrender of patent 
A patent may not be surrendered in opposition proceedings by the 
proprietor filing a declaration of surrender with the EPO. Such a surrender 
must be declared before the competent authorities in the designated states 
in question (see D-VII, 5.1). Nevertheless, if a proprietor unambiguously 
declares to the EPO the surrender (or abandonment or renunciation) of the 
patent, this is deemed equivalent to a request that the patent be revoked 
(see also D-VIII, 1.2.5). 
Art. 79(3) 
Rule 39(2) and 
(3) 
Art. 87(4) 
Rule 84(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-1 
 
Chapter IX – Applications under the Patent 
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) 
1. General remarks 
The EPO may be a "designated Office" or an "elected Office" for an 
international application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) 
designating "EP" (Euro-PCT application). If an applicant enters the 
European phase without having requested international preliminary 
examination under PCT Chapter II, the EPO will act as a "designated 
Office". If before entering the European phase the application was 
processed under PCT Chapter II, the EPO will act in the European phase 
as an ''elected Office''. Pursuant to Art. 153(2), an international application 
for which the EPO is a designated or elected Office is deemed to be a 
European patent application. 
In addition to being a designated and, where appropriate, elected Office, 
the EPO may act as a receiving Office under the PCT within the terms set 
out in Art. 151. It may also act as an International Searching Authority 
(ISA), as an International Preliminary Examining Authority (IPEA) under the 
terms of Art. 152 and/or as an International Searching Authority specified 
for Supplementary International Search (SISA) under the PCT (see also the 
EPO-WIPO Agreement, OJ EPO 2017, A115, OJ EPO 2018, A24, and 
OJ EPO 2018, A35). There are thus the following possibilities for a 
European application filed under the provisions of the PCT: 
(i) 
the filing of the application and the international search take place at 
an office or offices other than the EPO (e.g. the Japan Patent Office). 
The EPO is a designated Office; 
(ii) 
the application is filed at another office (e.g. the United Kingdom 
Patent Office) but the EPO performs the international search. The 
EPO acts as International Searching Authority and is a designated 
Office; 
(iii) 
the application is filed at the EPO, which also performs the 
international search. The EPO acts as receiving Office, International 
Searching Authority and designated Office; 
(iv) 
in the cases mentioned under (i) - (iii), the applicant files, in addition, 
a demand for international preliminary examination with an IPEA 
other than the EPO. The EPO is an "elected Office"; 
(v) 
in the cases mentioned under (i) - (iii), the applicant files, in addition, 
a demand for international preliminary examination with the EPO as 
International Preliminary Examining Authority. The EPO may carry 
out this function irrespective of whether it was the receiving Office. It 
can, however, only act as an IPEA if the international search was 
carried out by the EPO, the Austrian, Spanish, Swedish, Finnish or 
Turkish Patent Office, the Nordic Patent Institute or the Visegrad 
Patent Institute. The EPO thus acts as IPEA and is also an elected 
Office; 
Art. 153(1)(a) and 
(b) 
Art. 153(2) 
Art. 150(2) 
Art. 151 
Art. 152 
Rule 157 
Rule 158 
Part E – Chapter IX-2 

 
 
(vi) 
if the international search has been carried out by an office other 
than the EPO, the applicant may still request the EPO to perform a 
supplementary international search (SIS) in its capacity as SISA. 
In case (i), there will be an international search report drawn up by another 
office. In cases (ii) and (iii), the international search report and the "written 
opinion 
of 
the 
International 
Searching 
Authority" 
(WO-ISA) 
(Rule 43bis PCT) will have been prepared by the search division of the 
EPO.  
For further details on the procedure before the EPO as RO, ISA, IPEA or 
SISA, see the Guidelines for search and examination at the EPO as PCT 
authority (GL/PCT-EPO) and the Guide for applicants: "'Euro-PCT Guide': 
PCT procedure at the EPO". 
2. 
EPO as designated or elected Office 
In proceedings before the EPO relating to international applications, the 
provisions of the PCT apply, supplemented by the provisions of the EPC. In 
case of conflict, the provisions of the PCT prevail. The EPO cannot require 
compliance with requirements relating to form or contents of the 
international application different from or additional to those which are 
provided for in the PCT. 
As a result of the prevalence of the PCT provisions and the requirements of 
Art. 150 and Art. 153 relating to international applications under the PCT in 
the European phase, the instructions in the earlier chapters of these 
Guidelines do not always apply to the procedure before the EPO as 
designated or elected Office. 
This section deals with the specific aspects of the procedure before the 
EPO as designated or elected Office. It addresses, in subsections E-IX, 2.2 
to 2.5 and 2.10, the formalities examination of international applications 
upon entry into the European phase in so far as it differs from that 
applicable to European direct applications, by reference to the instructions 
in the appropriate sections of Part A. 
2.1 Entry into the European phase 
2.1.1 Requirements for entry into the European phase 
"Entry into the European phase" is not an act in itself but a series of acts to 
be performed. In order to initiate the European phase, the applicant must 
perform the following acts within 31 months from the filing date or, if priority 
has been claimed, from the earliest priority date: 
– 
supply the translation if the Euro-PCT application was not published 
in one of the EPO's official languages (see E-IX, 2.1.3), 
– 
specify the application documents on which the European grant 
procedure is to be based, 
– 
pay the filing fee provided for in Art. 78(2), including the additional 
page fee for applications with more than 35 pages (see E-IX, 2.1.4), 
Art. 150(2) 
Art. 27(1) PCT 
Rule 159 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-3 
 
– 
pay the designation fee (and any extension or validation fees) if the 
period under Rule 39 has expired earlier (see E-IX, 2.3.11), 
– 
pay the search fee if a supplementary European search report is to 
be drawn up (see E-IX, 2.1.4 and E-IX, 2.5.3), 
– 
file the request for examination and pay the examination fee if the 
period under Rule 70(1) has expired earlier (see E-IX, 2.1.4), 
– 
pay the renewal fee for the third year if the period under Rule 51(1) 
has expired earlier (see E-IX, 2.3.12), 
– 
where applicable, file the certificate of exhibition mentioned in 
Art. 55(2) (see E-IX, 2.4.3). 
Depending on the circumstances of the particular application, the applicant 
may additionally have to complete one or more of the following acts within 
the 31-month time limit: 
– 
pay any claims fees due (see E-IX, 2.3.8), 
– 
file the designation of the inventor (see E-IX, 2.3.4), 
– 
furnish the file number or the certified copy of the application(s) of 
which priority is claimed (see E-IX, 2.3.5), 
– 
furnish 
a 
sequence 
listing 
complying 
with 
the 
standard 
(see E-IX, 2.4.2), 
– 
furnish the indications on the applicant mentioned in Rule 163(4) in 
respect of any applicant (see E-IX, 2.3.1), 
– 
appoint a professional representative (see E-IX, 2.3.1), 
– 
furnish a copy of the results of any search carried out by or on behalf 
of the authority with which the priority application was filed 
(see A-III, 6.12). 
Applicants are strongly recommended to use the most recent edition of 
Form 1200 available as editable electronic document from the EPO website 
(epo.org), as part of the Online Filing software or as part of the new online 
filing (CMS). For further details on the available filing methods see 
A-VIII, 2.5. The form and any other documents must be filed with the EPO, 
they may not be sent to the IB or to an authority of an EPC contracting 
state. 
The documents on which the proceedings in the European phase are to be 
based can best be indicated in section 6 of Form 1200; further details may 
be provided on an additional sheet. The applicant must make sure that the 
indications in section 6 and/or on the additional sheet correspond to any 
indications given in the table for section 6 provided for the calculation of the 
additional (page) fee to be paid for applications comprising more than 
Rule 159(1)(b) 
Part E – Chapter IX-4 

 
 
35 pages (see A-III, 13.2). If the applicant has filed test reports 
(e.g. comparative examples in support of inventive step) with the EPO as 
IPEA, it is assumed that the EPO may also use them in the European grant 
proceedings. 
If the applicant does not specify the application documents on which the 
European grant procedure is to be based, the international application as 
published as well as any amendments made in the international phase are 
considered to form part of the procedure. The additional fee to be paid for 
an application comprising more than thirty-five pages will be calculated on 
the basis of the international application as published; any amendment 
pages not specified as replacing the corresponding pages of the 
international publication will be taken as additional pages (see A-III, 13.2).  
2.1.2 Initial processing and formal examination; copy of the 
international application 
The initial processing and formal examination of international applications 
are carried out in the international phase by PCT authorities under the PCT. 
Unless there is a specific request for early processing (see E-IX, 2.8), the 
EPO acting as a designated or elected Office may not process or examine 
an international application prior to the expiry of 31 months from the date of 
filing of the application or, if priority has been claimed, from the earliest 
priority date (31-month time limit). The EPO will, however, prior to the 
expiry of the 31-month time limit, perform any purely administrative tasks 
such as adding documents relating to the European phase to the file and 
recording the professional European representative appointed to act on 
behalf of the applicant in the European phase, to ensure the correct 
notification of correspondence once the ban on processing has been lifted. 
Since 
the 
EPO 
has 
not 
exercised 
the 
waiver 
referred 
to 
in 
Art. 20(1)(a) PCT, a copy of the international application will be furnished 
by the International Bureau. The EPO does not require the applicant to 
furnish a copy of the international application under Art. 22 or 39 PCT, even 
if the International Bureau has not yet communicated a copy under 
Art. 20 PCT at the time the application enters the European phase 
(see PCT Gazette 14/1986, 2367). 
2.1.3 Translation of the international application 
Where the international application was not published in an official 
language of the EPO, the applicant is required, in accordance with Art. 22 
or 39 PCT and Rule 159(1)(a), to furnish a translation of the published 
application within a period of 31 months from the date of filing or, if priority 
has been claimed, from the earliest priority date (31-month time limit). The 
language of the translation determines the language of the proceedings 
before the EPO. 
The translation must include: 
(i) 
the description (as originally filed; the title as established by the ISA 
under Rule 37.2 PCT, if applicable), 
(ii) 
the claims (as originally filed), 
Art. 23 PCT 
Art. 40 PCT 
Rule 49.1(a bis) PCT 
Art. 24(1)(iii) PCT 
Rule 159(1) 
Rule 160 
Art. 121 
Art. 2(1), item 12, 
RFees 
Art. 14(2) and (3), 
153(4) 
Rule 159(1)(a) 
Rule 49.5(a) and (k) 
PCT 
Rule 49.5(a) PCT 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-5 
 
(iii) 
any text matter in the drawings except for the expression "Fig." (as 
originally filed), 
NB: In relation to items (i) to (iii) above, in the case of a correction of 
erroneously filed elements or parts under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT by the 
receiving Office (see C-III, 1.3), the translation must include both the 
erroneously filed application documents and the correct application 
documents with an indication as to which pages relate to the correct 
and which to the erroneously filed application documents, 
(iv) 
the abstract (as published), 
(v) 
any published request for rectification under Rule 91.3(d) PCT; 
(vi) 
any text matter contained in the sequence listing unless the text in 
the sequence listing is available to the EPO in English; the translation 
is to be furnished in the form of a copy of the complete sequence 
listing complying with the applicable WIPO standard including a 
translation of the text matter; 
(vii) 
any references to deposited biological material furnished separately, 
(viii) if the EPO acts as designated Office, and the applicant wishes the 
amended claims under Art. 19 PCT to form the basis of further 
proceedings, 
– 
the amendments under Art. 19 PCT in the form of a translation 
of the complete set of claims furnished under that provision 
and the statement under Art. 19(1) PCT, if submitted to the IB, 
and, 
– 
the accompanying letter, indicating the basis for the 
amendments in the application as filed (Rule 46.5(b) PCT), so 
as to allow the examiner to understand and take the 
amendments into account (see also E-IX, 3.4), 
(ix) 
if the EPO acts as elected Office, 
– 
all annexes to the international preliminary examination report 
(IPER), i.e. any replacement sheets and accompanying letters 
referred to in Rule 70.16 PCT that allow the examiner to 
understand the amendments, regardless of whether protection 
is sought for the same version of the application documents as 
was the subject of the IPER, 
– 
any amendments made to the claims under Art. 19 PCT (cf. 
item (viii) above) if the applicant wishes these amendments to 
form the basis of further proceedings and they are not 
annexed to the IPER (for instance because they were 
considered reversed by an amendment under Art. 34 PCT). 
Rule 49.5(a), (d) and 
Rule 49.5(f) PCT 
Rule 49.5(a) PCT 
Rules 12.1(d) and 
49.5(a-bis) PCT 
Rule 49.3 and 49.5(h) 
PCT 
Art. 19 PCT 
Rule 49.3, 49.5(a)(ii) 
and (c-bis) PCT 
Rules 3 and 137(4) 
Art. 39(1), 36(2)(b) 
and (3)(b) PCT 
Rules 70.16 
and 74.1(a) PCT 
Rule 76.5(iv) PCT 
Part E – Chapter IX-6 

 
 
If the applicant does not furnish the translation of any of the items (i) or (ii) 
above within the 31-month period, the application is deemed to be 
withdrawn under Rule 160(1). 
If the applicant does not furnish the translation of any of the items (iii) to (ix) 
above within the 31-month period, the EPO will invite him to furnish the 
translation within a two-month period from notification of the respective 
communication under Rule 159(1)(a). The same applies if, in the case of a 
correction of erroneously filed elements or parts under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT 
by the receiving Office (see C-III, 1.3), translations of the erroneously filed 
application documents (in relation to items (i) to (iii) above) have not been 
filed. If the applicant does not comply with this invitation 
– 
as regards items (iii) to (vii) above, the application is deemed to be 
withdrawn; 
– 
as regards translations of erroneously filed application documents (in 
relation to items (i) to (iii) above) in the case of a correction of 
erroneously filed elements or parts under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT by the 
receiving Office, the application is deemed to be withdrawn; 
– 
as regards the replacement sheets referred to in item (ix) above, the 
application is deemed to be withdrawn; 
– 
as regards the replacement sheets referred to in item (viii) above, the 
EPO will disregard the amendments under Art. 19 PCT; 
– 
as regards the accompanying letter and the statement referred to in 
item (viii) above, the EPO will disregard that letter and that statement 
and 
may 
proceed 
under 
Rule 137(4) 
where 
applicable 
(see E-IX, 3.4); 
– 
as regards the accompanying letters referred to item (ix) above, the 
EPO will disregard those letters and may proceed under Rule 137(4) 
where applicable (see E-IX, 3.4). 
Where the application is deemed to be withdrawn under Rule 160(1), 
Rule 112(2) applies mutatis mutandis. The loss of rights is deemed not to 
have occurred if, within two months as from notification of the 
communication, the translation and a valid request for further processing 
(including the payment of the requisite fee) are filed (Art. 121 and 
Rule 135(1), see E-VIII, 2). 
Where an international application was filed and published in the 
international phase in an official language of the EPO, it is not possible to 
change the language of the proceedings on entry into the European phase 
by filing a translation of that application into either of the other two official 
languages of the EPO (see G 4/08). In such cases, the language of the 
proceedings within the meaning of Art. 14(3) remains the language in which 
the application was published by WIPO's International Bureau. 
Art. 24(1)(iii) or 39(2) 
PCT 
Rule 160(1) 
Rule 49.5(c-bis), (g), 
(h) PCT 
Art. 24(1)(iii) or 39(2) 
PCT  
Rule 160(1) 
Art. 39(2) PCT 
Rule 160(1) 
Rule 49.5(c-bis) PCT 
Rule 3(2) 
Rule 49.5(c) PCT 
Rule 3(1) 
Rule 49.5(c) PCT 
Rule 3(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-7 
 
A translation, whether filed on entry into the European phase under 
Art. 153(4) or in the international phase under Rule 12.3 or 12.4 PCT, may 
always be brought into conformity with the application as filed. The 
conditions set out in A-VII, 7 apply. 
2.1.4 Filing fee, designation fee, request for examination and search 
fee 
Under Rule 159(1)(c), applicants must pay the filing fee, including any 
additional fee for pages in excess of thirty-five (see A-III, 13.2), within a 
period of 31 months from the date of filing or, if priority has been claimed, 
from the earliest priority date. Further, under Rule 159(1)(d), they must pay 
the designation fee within this period, if the time limit specified in Rule 39(1) 
has expired earlier. Under Rule 159(1)(f), the request for examination must 
also be filed within this period, if the time limit specified in Rule 70(1) has 
expired earlier (see also E-IX, 2.5.2). Where a supplementary European 
search report needs to be drawn up, a search fee must also be paid to the 
EPO within this period (see also E-IX, 2.5.3). Failure to pay in due time the 
filing fee, the additional fee, the search fee, the designation fee or the 
examination fee, or to file the request for examination, means that the 
application is deemed to be withdrawn. 
If the EPO finds that the application is deemed to be withdrawn for this 
reason, it communicates this to the applicant (Rule 160(2)). 
The communication under Rule 160(2) and the communication according to 
Rule 112(1) are sent together in one and the same communication. In 
response to this notification of a loss of rights, the applicant can request 
further processing (see E-VIII, 2). 
2.2 Instructions in Chapter A-II ("Filing of applications and 
examination on filing") 
The instructions in A-II, 1 ("Where and how applications may be filed") do 
not apply to international applications, except where explicit reference is 
made to international applications, including Euro-PCT applications. 
The PCT requirements corresponding to those of A-II, 2 ("Persons entitled 
to file an application") are more restrictive, as in general the applicant must 
be a resident or national of a PCT contracting state and therefore no further 
examination as regards entitlement is necessary. 
The instructions in A-II, 3 ("Procedure on filing") do not apply. 
The provisions for late filing of missing parts (Rule 56) or correction of 
erroneously filed application documents or parts (Rule 56a) completely 
contained in the priority document apply if the EPO is designated/elected 
Office. Similar options exist under the PCT in relation to the receiving Office 
(Rule 20.5 to 20.8 PCT). These sets of provisions apply in parallel. For a 
request under Rule 56 or Rule 56a to be allowed by the EPO as 
designated/elected Office, it must have been filed, together with the 
documents required under Rule 56(3) or Rule 56a(4) respectively, within 
two months from the date of filing or from a communication of the receiving 
Office under Rule 20.5(a) PCT or Rule 20.5bis(a) PCT, as the case may be 
Art. 153(4) 
Art. 14(2) 
Rule 159(1) 
Rule 160 
Art. 2(1), item 12, 
RFees 
Rule 56 
Rule 56a 
Rule 20 PCT 
Part E – Chapter IX-8 

 
 
(see Rule 56(2) and Rule 56a(3)), and the applicant must have effectively 
requested "early processing" under Art. 23(2) PCT (see E-IX, 2.8) before 
expiry of the two-month period under Rule 56(2) or Rule 56a(3). 
Incorporations by reference by the receiving Office under Rule 20.5bis(d) 
PCT, i.e. without changing the filing date, will be effective before the EPO 
as designated or elected Office for international applications filed on or after 
1 November 2022 (see C-III, 1.3). For details see the notice from the EPO 
dated 23 June 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A71. On entry into the European 
phase, the normal procedures apply on the basis that the correct and 
erroneously filed parts are thus considered part of the application as filed. 
In addition, Art. 26, 27 and 48 PCT, Rules 82bis and 82ter PCT and 
Rule 139 EPC apply. 
The date of filing (see A-II, 4 ("Examination on filing")) of a Euro-PCT 
application is that accorded under the PCT by the PCT authority which 
acted as the receiving Office unless correction as a consequence of review 
by the EPO as designated/elected Office under Art. 24 or 25 PCT or 
Rule 82ter PCT applies (see E-IX, 2.9). In respect of the procedure for 
establishing the date of filing in the case of elements or parts erroneously 
filed under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT, see C-III, 1.3. The formalities examination 
upon entry into the European phase encompasses all checks required to 
verify that the requirements of Rules 159 and 163 have been met. 
If the application is not deemed to be withdrawn, a copy of the application is 
referred to the search division for drawing up any supplementary European 
search report, if necessary (see E-IX, 3.1). 
2.3 Instructions in Chapter A-III ("Examination of formal 
requirements") 
2.3.1 Representation, address for correspondence 
The instructions in A-III, 2 ("Representation") apply to international 
applications whether furnished in an official language or in translation. An 
agent having a right to practise before the PCT International Authorities is 
not necessarily authorised to act before the EPO (see Art. 27(7) PCT). 
If the agents acting in the international phase are professional 
representatives entitled to practise before the EPO, such representatives 
are not automatically considered appointed for the European phase. If any 
applicant has mandated them to act on their behalf also in the European 
phase, the representatives need to identify themselves accordingly to the 
EPO as designated/elected Office. The only case in which professional 
representatives acting in the international phase are automatically 
considered appointed for the European phase is if they were validly 
appointed in the procedure before the EPO as receiving Office, ISA or IPEA 
and it is clear from the respective file that the appointment extends to 
representation in the European phase. The same principles apply where 
applicants having their residence or principal place of business in an EPC 
contracting state are represented by an authorised employee (see 
A-VIII, 1.3). 
Art. 24, 25, 26, 
27 and 48 PCT 
Rule 82bis and 
82ter PCT 
Rule 139 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-9 
 
Applicants, in particular those not resident in an EPC contracting state, are 
recommended to appoint a professional representative before the EPO in 
good time, i.e. before initiating proceedings before the EPO as 
designated/elected Office (see also E-IX, 2.1.2). 
However, up to expiry of the 31-month time limit under Rule 159, applicants 
having neither a residence nor their principal place of business within the 
territory of one of the contracting states may either comply with any 
requirement themselves or act through a professional representative 
entitled to practise before the EPO. This means that applicants having 
neither a residence nor the principal place of business within the territory of 
one of the contracting states may themselves , within the 31-month time 
limit, for example sign and file EPO Form 1200, submit amendments, file a 
translation of the application, file a request for early processing, etc. 
Applicants having neither a residence nor their principal place of business 
within the territory of one of the contracting states who do not themselves 
take the required steps for entry into the European phase within the 
31-month time limit may, after expiry of that time limit, perform these and 
the other procedural steps (e.g. filing a request for re-establishment of 
rights) only through a professional representative entitled to practise before 
the EPO. 
In case of failure to appoint a professional representative where this is 
required, the EPO invites the applicant to do so within a time limit of two 
months. Until the EPO is informed of a (valid) appointment, any procedural 
step taken by the applicant will be deemed not to have been taken. If the 
deficiency is not corrected in due time, the application will be refused; the 
applicant may request further processing (see E-VIII, 2). 
If there is more than one applicant and the following information was not 
provided for one or more of those applicants in the international phase and 
is still missing at the expiry of the 31-month time limit under Rule 159(1): 
(i) 
address 
(ii) 
nationality 
(iii) 
state of residence or principal place of business 
the EPO will invite the applicant to furnish these indications within 
two months. Failure to do so will lead to refusal of the application. 
The same applies if the requirements for representation are not met at the 
end of the 31-month time limit, with the same consequence for failure to 
correct the deficiency in time. If the applicants fail to reply in time to the 
above-mentioned invitation, they may request further processing. 
Applicants (whether natural or legal persons) whose residence or principal 
place of business is in an EPC contracting state and who act without a 
professional 
representative 
may 
make 
use 
of 
an 
address 
for 
correspondence which is different from their address of residence. 
See A-III, 4.2.1. 
Rule 163(5) - (6) 
Rule 163(4) - (6) 
Part E – Chapter IX-10 

 
 
2.3.2 Physical requirements 
Although compliance of an international application with the PCT 
requirements as to form and content is, as a rule, ascertained during the 
international phase, the EPO may check Euro-PCT applications entering 
the European phase for compliance with Rule 11 PCT. If the application 
documents do not comply with this provision, the EPO will issue a 
communication indicating any deficiencies and invite the applicant to 
correct them within a time limit of two months under Rule 58. 
Since the translation filed under Rule 159(1)(a) is filed for the procedure 
before the EPO as designated or elected Office, the translation must 
comply with the physical requirements as set out in A-III, 3 ("Physical 
requirements"). The requirements are in general identical with the 
corresponding requirements of the PCT. 
2.3.3 Request for grant 
The PCT request corresponds in general to the EPO request for grant form 
(EPO Form 1001) and provides for the entry of the information listed in 
Rule 41(2), 
with 
the 
exception 
of 
the 
items 
referred 
to 
in 
sub-paragraphs (e) and (f) thereof. 
2.3.4 Designation of inventor 
The requirement, as set out in A-III, 5 ("Designation of inventor"), that the 
designation of inventor is filed in a separate document where the applicant 
is not the inventor or the sole inventor has to be complied with irrespective 
of the language of the international application unless the inventor has 
already been named in the PCT request. Where an inventor has been 
named in the PCT request, the latter cannot waive their right to be 
mentioned in the published application. If the inventor has not been named 
in the international application at the expiry of the period of 31 months from 
the date of filing, or, in the case of priority, from the earliest date of priority 
claimed (31-month time limit), the EPO invites the applicant to file the 
designation of inventor within a period of two months. Failure to rectify this 
deficiency in time, leads to refusal of the application according to 
Rule 163(6). Applicants will be notified of this decision according to 
Rule 111. They may request further processing (see E-VIII, 2). 
2.3.5 Claim to priority 
The claim to priority (see A-III, 6 ("Claim to priority")) for an international 
application refers to the date, or dates, claimed under the PCT. 
2.3.5.1 Priority document 
Normally, the copy of the previous application, referred to in A-III, 6.7, 
i.e. the priority document, is furnished to the EPO as designated Office by 
the International Bureau and not by the applicant. In accordance with 
Rule 17.2 PCT, the International Bureau will be requested by the EPO to 
furnish it with a copy as standard practice promptly, but not earlier than 
international publication, or, where the applicant has requested early 
processing (in accordance with Art. 23(2) PCT), not earlier than the date of 
the request. Where the applicant has complied with Rule 17.1(a), (b) or 
(b-bis) PCT, the EPO may not ask the applicant himself to furnish a copy. 
Rule 163(1) 
Rule 17.1 and 
17.2 PCT 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-11 
 
Where the file number or the copy of the previous application has not yet 
been submitted at the expiry of the 31-month time limit, the EPO invites the 
applicant to furnish the number or the copy within two months. However, 
Rule 53(2) and the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
18 October 2018, OJ EPO 2018, A78, providing an exception to the 
requirement that a copy of the previous application be furnished 
(see A-III, 6.7), also apply to international applications entering the 
European phase. Furthermore, where the applicant has complied with 
Rule 17.1(a), (b) or (b-bis) PCT the EPO as a designated Office may not 
ask the applicant himself to furnish it with a copy of the priority document 
(Rule 17.2(a) PCT, second sentence). 
If the priority document is not on file, substantive examination may 
nevertheless be started, provided that neither intermediate documents 
(published in the priority period) nor Art. 54(3) documents exist which cause 
the patentability of the subject-matter claimed to depend on the validity of 
the priority right. However, no European patent may be granted until such 
time as the priority document is on file. In such a case, the applicant is 
informed that the decision to grant will not be taken as long as the priority 
document is missing. 
On the other hand, the application may be refused without the priority 
document being on file, provided that the relevant prior art is neither an 
intermediate document nor an Art. 54(3) document, the relevance of which 
depends on the validity of the priority right. For more details on treatment of 
such cases in examination see F-VI, 3.4. 
Where a translation of the previous application into one of the official 
languages of the EPO is required, it must be filed on request from the EPO 
in accordance with Rule 53(3) (see A-III, 6.8 and subsections and 6.10). 
2.3.5.2 Information on prior art 
The applicant must, on entry into the European phase, file the results of 
any search carried out by or on behalf of the office of first filing for each 
application whose priority is claimed (see A-III, 6.12). 
2.3.5.3 Restoration of priority 
The provisions for restoration of priority right (see A-III, 6.6) also exist under 
the PCT (Rules 26bis.3 and 49ter PCT). Under the PCT, restoration of the 
right of priority can be made either in the international phase before the 
receiving Office (Rule 26bis.3 PCT) or upon entry into the European phase 
before the EPO as designated or elected Office (Rule 49ter.2(b)(i) PCT). 
The EPO only applies the "due care" criterion in accordance with its 
practice under Art. 122 (Rules 26bis.3(a)(i) and 49ter.2(a)(i) PCT; see also 
E-VIII, 3.2 and the notice from the EPO dated 7 November 2007, 
OJ EPO 2007, 692). As a consequence, any request for restoration of 
priority rights granted by a receiving Office under the "unintentional" 
criterion does not have any effect before the EPO as designated/elected 
Office (Rule 49ter.1(b) PCT). 
Rule 163(2) 
Art. 88(1) 
Rule 53(3) 
Part E – Chapter IX-12 

 
 
As set out hereafter, if the applicant has already filed a request for 
restoration of priority with the receiving Office, a (new) request need not 
always be filed upon entry into the European phase. 
If the priority right was restored by the receiving Office under the "due care 
criterion", no new request need be filed with the EPO as designated/elected 
Office, since the EPO will, in principle, recognise the decision of the 
receiving Office. If, however, the EPO has reasonable doubt that the 
requirements for grant were met, it will notify the applicant accordingly. In 
this communication the reasons for such doubt will be indicated and a time 
limit will be set within which the applicant may submit comments. 
Consequently, if the applicant wants the priority claim to be valid in the 
procedure before the EPO as designated/elected Office, a request for 
restoration must always be filed if, in the procedure before the receiving 
Office: 
– 
no request for restoration of priority right was filed; 
– 
a request for restoration of priority right was rejected; 
– 
a request for restoration of priority right was granted under the 
"unintentional criterion". 
The EPO as designated/elected Office will grant a request for restoration of 
priority right only if the following requirements are met: 
(i) 
the filing date is within two months of the date of expiry of the priority 
period; 
(ii) 
the failure to claim the right of priority within the priority period 
occurred in spite of due care required by the circumstances having 
been taken; 
(iii) 
a request for restoration of priority is filed within one month from the 
date on which the 31-month time limit for entry into the European 
phase expired or from the effective date of early entry into the 
European phase (see E-IX, 2.8); where the application is deemed 
withdrawn under Rule 160(1) for failure to comply with a requirement 
under Rule 159(1), the request for restoration of priority may still be 
filed together with a timely request for further processing in respect of 
the 31-month time limit under Rule 159(1) or, failing this, with a timely 
request for re-establishment of rights in respect of the period for 
requesting further processing; 
(iv) 
the fee for restoration of priority (Art. 2(1), item 13, RFees) is duly 
paid within the time limit mentioned under point (iii); the further 
considerations made under point (iii) also apply to this fee; 
(v) 
the request is accompanied by a statement of reasons for the failure 
to file the international application within the priority period and is 
Rule 49ter PCT 
Art. 122 
PCT Newsletter 
9/2015, 10 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-13 
 
preferably accompanied by any declaration or other evidence in 
support of the statement of reasons. 
2.3.6 Title of the invention 
In relation to A-III, 7 ("Title of the invention"), the title need only meet the 
less demanding requirements of Rule 4.3 PCT rather than those set out in 
A-III, 7.1 and 7.2. 
2.3.7 Prohibited matter 
As prohibited statements or matter may not necessarily be omitted under 
Art. 21(6) PCT, the application must be examined to ensure that the 
instructions in A-III, 8 ("Prohibited matter") are complied with. Where the 
EPO is informed by the International Bureau that statements or matter were 
omitted from the published PCT application, the Receiving Section has to 
ensure that the corresponding material is excluded from the translation as 
furnished by the applicant (see E-IX, 2.1.3). 
2.3.8 Claims fee 
The time limit for paying the claims fee referred to in A-III, 9 is 31 months 
from the date of filing or, if priority has been claimed, from the earliest 
priority date (Rule 162(1)). 
If they have not been paid by then, under Rule 162(2), they may still be 
paid within the six-month period under Rule 161(1) and (2). Rule 162(2) 
distinguishes between two situations in which the applicant must ensure 
payment of claims fees before expiry of the six-month period: 
Rule 162(2), first sentence, covers the situation in which the applicant does 
not file amendments after expiry of the 31-month period and before expiry 
of the six-month period under Rule 161. In this case, the applicant must 
ensure that any claims fees not yet paid for the set of claims filed within the 
31-month period are paid before expiry of the six-month period under 
Rule 161. 
Example: 
A Euro-PCT application X contains 27 claims on expiry of the 31-month 
period. The applicants pay five claims fees within the 31-month period. 
They must ensure that seven claims fees are paid before expiry of the 
six-month period under Rule 161. 
Rule 162(2), second sentence, covers the situation in which the applicants 
file an amended set of claims after expiry of the 31-month period and 
before expiry of the six-month period under Rule 161. In this case, they 
must compute the number of claims fees due on the basis of the claims on 
file on expiry of the six-month period under Rule 161. Before expiry of this 
period, they must ensure that any claims fees are paid for the number of 
claims on file on expiry of this period which exceeds the number of claims 
for which claims fees were paid within the 31-month period. 
Rule 162(2) 
Part E – Chapter IX-14 

 
 
Example: 
A Euro-PCT application Y contains 27 claims on expiry of the 31-month 
period. The applicants pay five claims fees within the 31-month period. 
After expiry of the 31-month period and before expiry of the six-month 
period under Rule 161, they file an amended set of 32 claims. The 
applicants must compute the number of claims fees on the basis of the 
claims on file on expiry of the six-month period, i.e. 32 - 15 = 17. Since they 
have already paid five claims fees, they must pay 12 claims fees (17 - 5 = 
12) before expiry of the six-month period under Rule 161. 
If there are more than 15 claims on file on expiry of the six-month period 
under Rule 161, any of the sixteenth and each subsequent claim for which 
no claims fee has been paid is deemed to be abandoned under Rule 162(4) 
(see 
also 
the 
notice 
from 
the 
EPO 
dated 
16 December 2016, 
OJ EPO 2016, A103). 
Where a claims fee is not paid in due time, the claim concerned shall be 
deemed to be abandoned. The loss of rights may be remedied by a request 
for further processing (see E-VIII, 2). Features of a claim deemed to have 
been abandoned pursuant to Rule 162(4) and which are not otherwise to 
be found in the description or drawings cannot subsequently be 
reintroduced into the application and, in particular, into the claims. 
2.3.9 Drawings 
The provisions of the EPC concerning the filing of drawings (see A-II, 5 and 
A-III, 3.2) are identical with the corresponding provisions of the PCT and 
therefore no supplementary examination is necessary, provided that the 
provisions of Rule 11 PCT have been complied with (see also E-IX, 2.3.2). 
2.3.10 Abstract 
The abstract (see A-III, 10 ("Abstract")) is included in the copy of the 
international application supplied to the EPO. 
2.3.11 Designation fee 
The time limit for paying the designation fee is 31 months from the date of 
filing or, if priority has been claimed, from the earliest priority date 
(31-month time limit), if the time limit specified in Rule 39(1) has expired 
earlier (Rule 159(1)(d)) (see A-III, 11.2.5 for further details). If, subsequent 
to the receipt of the international application by the EPO and prior to the 
date on which processing or examination may start, the regional 
designation of all contracting states of the EPC is withdrawn, the Euro-PCT 
application, in so far as it is deemed to be a European application pursuant 
to Art. 153(2) and Art. 11(3) PCT, is deemed to be withdrawn. 
For information on the requirements for extension or validation of a 
Euro-PCT application to states for which an Extension Agreement or a 
Validation Agreement with the EPO has become effective, see A-III, 12. 
2.3.12 Renewal fees 
The renewal fees for a Euro-PCT application are due in respect of the third 
and each subsequent year, calculated from the date of filing of the 
Rule 159(1)(g) 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-15 
 
Euro-PCT application as accorded by the receiving Office. If, according to 
Rule 51(1), the renewal fee for the third year fell due within the 31-month 
time limit for entry into the European phase, the due date is deferred and 
the fee may still be paid without surcharge up to expiry of the 31-month 
time limit (see A-X, 5.2.4). 
2.4 Instructions in Chapter A-IV ("Special provisions") 
2.4.1 Divisional applications 
In relation to A-IV, 1 ("European divisional applications") there is no 
provision in the PCT for filing divisional applications. One or more 
European divisional applications may be filed in respect of subject-matter 
contained in a pending Euro-PCT application, but not before the latter 
application has entered the European phase (see A-IV, 1.1), i.e. not before 
the time limit under Rule 159(1) (in conjunction with Art. 22(1) PCT and 
Art. 22(3) PCT) has expired (see G 1/09, Reasons 3.2.5), and on condition 
that any requirement of Art. 22(1) PCT which must be fulfilled within that 
time limit for the application concerned is met (see J 18/09). Furthermore, 
divisional applications may be filed as from the date the applicant has filed 
an effective request for early processing (see J 18/09, Reasons 9, and 
E-IX, 2.8). 
The requirements of Rule 36 for filing divisionals must be complied with 
(see A-IV, 1). The divisional application must be filed in the language 
specified in Rule 36(2) (see A-IV, 1.3.3). In order to avoid that the 
Euro-PCT application is deemed withdrawn at the time a divisional 
application is filed, the respective requirements of Rule 159(1) must be 
fulfilled within the relevant time limits (see also E-IX, 2.1.2, E-IX, 2.1.3 and 
E-IX, 2.1.4). 
2.4.2 Sequence listings 
In relation to A-IV, 5 ("Applications relating to nucleotide and amino acid 
sequences"), where the Euro-PCT application discloses nucleotide or 
amino acid sequences, a sequence listing in electronic form drawn up in 
compliance with the applicable WIPO standard must be available to the 
EPO as designated/elected Office on expiry of the 31-month time limit. As a 
rule, it will be available to the EPO if it was contained in the international 
application under Rule 5.2 PCT or filed under Rule 13ter PCT with the EPO 
acting as ISA/SISA or IPEA. It will also be accessible to the EPO if it is 
made available by WIPO on PATENTSCOPE and can be downloaded in a 
usable form. 
If such a sequence listing is not available to the EPO and has not been filed 
by the applicant, at the expiry of the 31-month time limit, the applicant will 
be invited to furnish the sequence listing in electronic form in accordance 
with the applicable WIPO standard and pay a late-furnishing fee within a 
period of two months (see Rule 163(3) and 30(3)). The sequence listing 
may not be filed on paper or in PDF format (see the decision of the 
President of the EPO dated 9 December 2021 (OJ EPO 2021, A96) and 
point 6 of the notice from the EPO dated 9 December 2021 (OJ EPO 2021, 
A97). 
Rule 163(3) 
Part E – Chapter IX-16 

 
 
If the required sequence listing is not filed within the time limit set, the 
application is refused. The refusal may be remedied by a request for further 
processing (see E-VIII, 2). 
2.4.3 Certificate of exhibition 
As regards the requirements described in A-IV, 3 ("Display at an 
exhibition"), for Euro-PCT applications the certificate of exhibition, where 
relevant, is to be filed within the 31-month time limit for entry into the 
European phase. If the document is not filed in due time, the applicant is 
informed of this in a communication under Rule 112(1). The omission may 
be remedied by a request for further processing, which will be granted if 
within two months from notification of the communication the certificate is 
furnished and the fee for further processing is paid (see E-VIII, 2). 
2.4.4 Biological material 
With respect to A-IV, 4 ("Applications relating to biological material"), no 
remedy is available before the EPO as designated/elected Office upon 
entry into the European phase if the specific requirements for the sufficient 
disclosure of the invention have not been met in the international phase. If, 
however, on filing the international application a reference to the deposit of 
biological material complying with Rule 31 was made but no proof of the 
deposit in the form of a copy of the deposit receipt issued by the depositary 
institution was submitted, the applicant is strongly advised to do so upon 
entry into the European phase. See also F-III, 6.5. 
If the Euro-PCT application was not published by the IB in an official 
language of the EPO, the biological material referred to in the application is 
available upon request to any person (only) from the date of publication of 
the translation by the EPO (see E-IX, 2.5.1). In this case, if the applicant 
files the statement under Rule 32(1) before the technical preparations for 
publication of the translation by the EPO are completed, the biological 
material concerned will be made available only by the issue of a sample to 
an independent expert nominated by the requester (see A-IV, 4.3). 
2.5 Instructions in Chapter A-VI ("Publication of application; request 
for examination and transmission of the dossier to examining 
division") 
2.5.1 Publication of the international application 
The international publication of a Euro-PCT application in an official 
language of the European Patent Office takes the place of publication of 
the European patent application and will be mentioned in the European 
Patent Bulletin. If the international publication of the Euro-PCT application 
is in another language, a translation into one of the official languages must 
be filed with the EPO within 31 months of the priority date (Art. 22(1) PCT 
and Rule 159(1)(a)), see E-IX, 2.1.3. The EPO will publish the translation of 
the application submitted by the applicant upon entry into the European 
phase. In that case the provisional protection is, subject to Art. 67(2) and 
(3), only effective as from the date of publication of the translation by the 
EPO. 
Rule 159(1)(h) 
Rule 31 
Art. 153(3) and 
(4) 
Rule 159 
Art. 67 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-17 
 
The translation of the international application is published together with the 
bibliographic data as an A document and includes all documents that were 
part of the international publication as originally published: 
– 
the description as originally filed; 
– 
the claims as originally filed; 
– 
any claims amended under Art. 19 PCT, including any related 
statement of which a translation has been filed (see E-IX, 2.1.3, 
items (viii) and (ix)); 
– 
any drawings as originally filed; 
– 
the sequence listing forming part of the description; 
– 
the abstract; 
– 
any appendices to the application; 
– 
any certificate(s) of the deposit of biological material; 
– 
the translation of the international search report (Rule 44bis.3 PCT). 
The mandatory translation of the annexes to the IPER and any 
amendments to the application documents filed on or after entry into the 
European phase are not published. 
If Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT applies (see C-III, 1.3), the publication will comprise 
the translation of both the erroneously filed application documents and the 
correct application documents. The front page of the publication will make 
reference to the fact that the notification of incompatibility under 
Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT applies to the application if the application was filed 
between 1 July 2020 and 31 October 2022. The notification of 
incompatibility was withdrawn with effect from 1 November 2022 and is no 
longer indicated for applications filed on or after that date. 
Pursuant to Art. 153(6), the international search report takes the place of 
the European search report. Once the supplementary European search 
report has been drawn up, this will be mentioned in the European Patent 
Bulletin. The supplementary search report itself is not published but is 
available via file inspection (see A-XI, 2.2). 
If the translation is not supplied, the application is to be deemed withdrawn 
(see E-IX, 2.1.3). Furthermore, in this case, the application which has been 
published under the PCT is not considered as comprised in the state of the 
art in accordance with Art. 54(3) pursuant to Rule 165 (see G-IV, 5.2). 
2.5.2 Request for examination 
The time limit under Rule 70(1) for filing the request for examination 
referred to in A-VI, 2 runs from the date of publication under Art. 21 PCT of 
the international search report. However, this time limit will not expire 
Rule 160(1) 
Rule 165 
Art. 153(6) 
Art. 150(2) 
Rule 159(1)(f) 
Part E – Chapter IX-18 

 
 
before the time prescribed by Rule 159(1)(f) (31-month time limit). See also 
E-IX, 2.1.4. 
European substantive examination must normally not begin before expiry of 
the 31st month from the earliest priority date (Art. 23(1), 40(1) PCT). The 
only circumstance in which examination may begin earlier is if the applicant 
has expressly so requested (see E-IX, 2.8) and if any required 
supplementary European search report is available. 
2.5.3 Supplementary European search 
If a supplementary European search report has to be drawn up in respect 
of an international application which is deemed to be a European patent 
application, the applicant is entitled to receive the invitation provided for in 
Rule 70(2) (see A-VI, 2.2, third paragraph, and J 8/83). A time limit of 
six months from the notification of this communication is set for filing the 
confirmation required under Rule 70(2) and for response to the search 
opinion accompanying the supplementary European search report 
(Rule 70a(2) and the notice from the EPO dated 15 October 2009, 
OJ EPO 2009, 533). Applicants making use of Form 1200 for entry into the 
European phase may waive the right to be asked whether they wish to 
proceed further by ticking a check box in section 12.2 (see the notice from 
the EPO dated 7 July 2017, OJ EPO 2017, A74). 
2.6 Reduction and refunds of fees in respect of international (PCT) 
applications 
See A-X, 9.3 and 10.2. 
2.7 Communication to the EPO as a designated Office 
A copy of the application together with the international search report or a 
declaration in accordance with Art. 17(2)(a) PCT is communicated by the 
International Bureau to the EPO as a designated Office in accordance with 
Art. 20(1)(a) PCT; the EPO does not require the applicant to furnish a copy 
of the international application (Rule 49.1(a-bis) PCT). The EPO as a 
designated Office will then examine the application for compliance with the 
requirements of the EPC (see in particular E-IX, 2.2 and 2.3). 
The International Bureau shall communicate the International Preliminary 
Report on Patentability (Chapter I of the PCT) and any informal comments 
received from the applicant to the EPO as designated Office at 30 months 
from the priority date. 
2.8 Early processing 
When acting as a designated Office, the EPO must not process or examine 
an international application before expiry of the period applicable under 
Art. 22 PCT (Art. 23(1) PCT). However, the EPO may, on the express 
request of the applicant, process or examine an international application at 
any time (Art. 23(2) PCT). If the International Bureau (IB) has not yet 
transmitted to the EPO a copy of the international application, the ISR and 
the WO-ISA, the applicant may but does not have to file with the IB a 
request to do so. If necessary, the EPO will take care of this itself. 
Rule 70(2) 
Art. 20(1)(a) PCT 
Rule 44bis.2 PCT 
Art. 23 PCT 
Rule 44bis.2 PCT 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-19 
 
A request for early processing under Art. 23(2) or 40(2) PCT may be filed 
with the EPO at any time before expiry of the 31-month time limit 
(Art. 22(3) PCT and Rule 159(1)). The request does not require a specific 
wording, but applicants must clearly express that they wish the processing 
of their application before the EPO as designated/elected Office to 
commence early. Applicants using EPO Form 1200 may file a request by 
ticking a check box in section 12.1 (see the notice from the EPO dated 
7 July 2017, OJ EPO 2017, A74). 
For the request to be effective, applicants must comply with the 
requirements stipulated in Rule 159(1) as if the 31-month time limit expired 
on the date they request early processing, i.e.: payment of the filing fee 
(including any additional fee under Art. 2(1), item 1a, RFees if the 
application comprises more than 35 pages), filing of a translation (if a 
translation is required under Art. 153(4)), specification of the application 
documents, and payment of the search fee (where a supplementary 
European search report has to be drawn up under Art. 153(7)). Which 
further requirements stipulated in Rule 159(1) must be complied with 
depends on the date on which early processing is requested, since the 
(regular) time limits for paying the designation fee (Rule 39(1)) and the 
renewal fee (Rule 51(1)) and for filing the request for examination and 
paying the examination fee (Rule 70(1)) may not have expired on the date 
the request for early processing is filed. Therefore, if any of these time 
limits is still running on that date (or, in the case of the renewal fee, if the 
due date according to Rule 51(1) is later than that date), the request for 
early processing will be effective without the requirement(s) concerned 
having been complied with (Art. 153(2), Art. 11(3) PCT). 
If applicants wish not only the processing of the application before the EPO 
as designated/elected Office but also the examination of the application to 
start, they must have filed a valid request for examination (including 
payment of the examination fee), even if the time limit under Rule 70(1) has 
not yet expired at the date of effective entry into the European phase, since 
examination will be taken up only if a request for examination has been 
validly filed (see E-IX, 2.5.2). Furthermore, if a request for examination is 
filed before the EPO has, where applicable, sent the supplementary 
European search report to the applicants, examination will start only upon 
receipt of an indication from them that they wish to proceed further with the 
application and, if required, a response to the extended European search 
report (see E-IX, 2.5.3). 
For international applications filed between 1 July 2020 and 31 October 
2022, 
correction 
of 
erroneously 
filed 
elements 
or 
parts 
under 
Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT by the receiving Office is not effective in proceedings 
before the EPO as designated/elected Office in accordance with the EPO's 
declaration of incompatibility (Rule 20.8 PCT). Thus, applicants who want 
to make use of the abridged procedure (by requesting that the correct 
application documents be disregarded or by indicating that they wish to 
pursue the application containing the correct application documents with 
the date of receipt of those application documents as the filing date – see 
C-III, 1.3) must inform the EPO accordingly at the time the request for early 
Art. 23(2) and 
40(2) PCT 
Rule 159(1) 
Rule 20.5bis PCT 
OJ EPO 2022, A3 
Part E – Chapter IX-20 

 
 
processing is validly filed or at the latest before the communication under 
Rules 20.8(c) and 82ter.1(c) and (d) PCT is issued. 
The automatic debiting procedure may be used for effecting payment of the 
fees falling due on filing the request (see Annex A.1 and Annex A.2 to the 
ADA, Supplementary publication 3, OJ EPO 2022). However, automatic 
debiting can only be performed if the EPO can establish whether or not a 
page fee needs to be included as part of the filing fee (see A-III, 13.2). This 
is only possible if the EPO has access to the documents referred to in 
Art. 20 PCT, i.e. if: 
– 
the international application has already been published at the time 
the request for early processing is received, 
– 
the EPO is the receiving Office, or 
– 
the EPO is acting as (S)ISA or IPEA. 
If none of the above documents is available to the EPO on the day the 
request for early processing is filed, applicants are advised to choose 
another means of payment. Otherwise the fees due will be debited on the 
date of receipt of the documents referred to in Art. 20 PCT from the 
International Bureau (Rule 47.4 PCT) and the date on which the request for 
early processing takes effect will be postponed to that date. 
If pursuant to Rule 159(1)(h) a certificate of exhibition must be filed and this 
requirement is not met, this will not prevent the request for early processing 
from being effective, but it will affect the prior art that the EPO takes into 
account in the European phase. 
If on the date the request for early processing is filed any necessary 
requirement is not complied with, the request will be effective only as from 
the date on which all necessary requirements have been complied with. 
If on the date the request for early processing is filed all necessary 
requirements for entry into the European phase are complied with, the 
request is effective and the Euro-PCT application will as from that date be 
processed in the same way as a Euro-PCT application which has entered 
the European phase by fulfilling the necessary requirements of Rule 159(1) 
within the 31-month time limit and without a request for early processing 
having been filed. On that date the international phase is thus terminated in 
respect of the EPO as designated/elected Office (J 18/09, Reasons 13). 
Moreover, since by filing an effective request for early processing the 
processing ban is lifted, as from that date it is no longer possible to claim 
the 31-month time limit under Rule 159(1). For details see the notice from 
the EPO dated 21 February 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 156. 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-21 
 
2.9 Review by the EPO as a designated/elected Office and 
rectification of errors made by the receiving Office or the International 
Bureau 
2.9.1 Review by the EPO under Art. 25 PCT 
The EPO may decide, in accordance with Art. 25 PCT, to allow an 
international application deemed to be withdrawn, or not accorded a filing 
date, to proceed as a European application. 
To obtain such a review by the EPO as designated Office, applicants must 
take the following steps within the two-month time limit under 
Rule 51.1 PCT: 
– 
request the IB to send copies of documents in the files promptly to 
the EPO as designated Office, 
– 
pay the filing fee under Rule 159(1)(c) and, where required, 
– 
furnish a translation of the Euro-PCT application. 
Applicants are recommended to undertake the remaining steps for entry 
into the European phase under Rule 159(1) at the same time, possibly 
together with a request for early processing (see E-IX, 2.8). 
The formalities officer acting on behalf of the examining division is 
competent to take decisions in relation to these applications (see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, 
OJ EPO 2014, A6), and the Receiving Section transfers copies of any 
documents received from the International Bureau under the circumstances 
of Art. 25(1)(a) PCT to the examining division. Where it is decided that the 
application can proceed as a European application, the search and 
examination is carried out as for other applications, taking into account as 
the date of filing of the application the date it was originally filed with the 
PCT receiving Office and claiming the priority date of the international 
application, as applicable. 
2.9.2 Review by the EPO under Art. 24 PCT and excuse of delays 
under Art. 48(2) PCT 
Pursuant to Art. 24(2) PCT, the EPO as designated/elected Office may 
maintain the application as a European application even if this is not 
required by virtue of Art. 25(2) PCT (see also OJ EPO 1984, 565, 
Reasons 4). The filing of a request under Art. 24(2) PCT is governed by the 
same requirements as a request for review under Art. 25(2) PCT 
(see E-IX, 2.9.1), with the exception that the two-month time limit under 
Rule 51 PCT does not apply (see J 19/16, Reasons 6). Such requests may 
have to be combined with a request for re-establishment of rights under 
Art. 122 or further processing under Art. 121 (see E-VIII, 2 and E-VIII, 3) as 
the appropriate means of remedying the non-observance of a time limit 
under the EPC. 
Art. 25 PCT, Rules 51 
and 82ter PCT 
Rule 159(2) 
Art. 24(2), 48(2), 
Rule 82bis PCT 
Art. 122, 121 
Part E – Chapter IX-22 

 
 
2.9.3 Rectification of errors made by the receiving Office or the 
International Bureau 
If the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the EPO that the international 
filing date is incorrect owing to an error made by the receiving Office or that 
the priority claim has been erroneously considered not to have been made, 
and if the error is such that, had it been made by the EPO itself, the EPO 
would rectify it under the EPC, the EPO must rectify the error on the 
applicant's request and treat the international application as if it had been 
accorded the rectified international filing date or as if the priority claim had 
not been considered not to have been made (see also E-IX, 2.9.1). 
Further, if a receiving Office accords the international filing date on the 
basis of incorporation by reference of missing parts under Rule 20.5 PCT, 
the EPO as designated/elected Office will review of its own motion whether 
the requirements of Rule 82ter.1(b)(i)-(iii) PCT have been complied with. In 
particular, the EPO will consider whether the element or part incorporated 
by reference was indeed missing. For instance, where the international 
application contained a description and a claim or claims on the 
international filing date, it is not possible to replace these elements with 
elements from a priority application. It is also not possible to add elements 
from a priority application if this would result in the international application 
having, for instance, two (or more) descriptions or two (or more) sets of 
claims. As of 1 July 2020, such cases may however be handled by the 
receiving Office under Rule 20.5bis PCT (see E-IX, 2.9.4 for the 
determination of the filing date in such a case). 
If the EPO does not agree with the finding of the receiving Office, it will 
notify the applicant that it intends to consider the (later) date on which the 
missing element or part was furnished as the international filing date in the 
European patent grant procedure, giving the applicant the opportunity to 
comment in accordance with Art. 113(1). In the case of missing parts, the 
applicant may also request that the missing part concerned be disregarded 
in the European patent grant procedure. In that case, the missing part will 
be considered not to have been furnished and the EPO will not treat the 
international application as if the international filing date had been 
corrected. 
2.9.4 Determination of filing date in the case of erroneously filed 
elements or parts of the international application 
Rule 20.5bis PCT, which entered into force on 1 July 2020, allows 
applicants to correct an erroneously filed element (description or claims) or 
part of the description, claims or drawings (including all drawings) 
contained in an international application. Following the entry into force of 
new Rule 56a on 1 November 2022, the notification of incompatibility under 
Rule 20.8(b-bis) PCT of this provision with the EPC legal framework has 
been withdrawn. As a consequence, incorporation by reference by the 
receiving Office under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT, i.e. without changing the filing 
date, will be effective before the EPO as designated or elected Office for 
international applications filed on or after 1 November 2022. 
For international applications filed between 1 July 2020 and 31 October 
2022, the limitation under the procedure described in E-IX, 2.2 and 
Rule 82ter.1(a) PCT 
Art. 11(1)(iii)(d), (e), 
Rule 4.18, Rule 
20.5bis PCT, 20.6, 
82ter.1(b) PCT 
Rule 82ter.1(c), (d) 
PCT 
Rule 20.5bis, 
20.8(b-bis) PCT 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-23 
 
C-III, 1.3 remains unchanged. If the receiving Office considered the correct 
application 
documents 
to 
be 
incorporated 
by 
reference 
under Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT, i.e. without changing the filing date, this 
incorporation will not be effective in proceedings before the EPO as 
designated/elected Office. For the procedure applied for establishing the 
filing date and the application documents forming the basis of proceedings, 
see C-III, 1.3. 
2.10 Inspection of files 
In its capacity as a designated Office, the EPO also allows access to its 
files pertaining to the international phase of applications, provided that 
international 
publication 
has 
taken 
place. 
The 
above 
applies 
mutatis mutandis to the communication of information from the files. 
In its capacity as elected Office the EPO allows access to its files (including 
the entire PCT Chapter II file) relating to the international phase of 
applications filed on or after 1 July 1998, provided international publication 
has taken place and, as far as the PCT Chapter II file is concerned, the 
IPER has been completed. 
The above applies mutatis mutandis to the communication of information 
from the files (see A-XI, 2 and A-XI, 3). 
3. The communication according to Rule 161 
3.1 Applications for which a supplementary European search report 
is prepared 
Where the EPO has not drawn up an international search report (as ISA) or 
a supplementary international search report (as the authority charged with 
the supplementary international search (SISA)), the application is subject to 
a supplementary European search under Art. 153(7) (see B-II, 4.3.2); a 
supplementary European search report and search opinion are issued 
accordingly (see B-XI, 1 and 2). The first communication is then issued as 
in C-III, 4. 
In such cases, promptly after entry into the European phase, the applicant 
is invited to amend the application within a period of six months (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 29 June 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 406, and the 
notice from the EPO dated 15 October 2009, OJ EPO 2009, 533). All 
amendments and comments filed within this period will be taken into 
account in drawing up the supplementary European search report and the 
search opinion. The supplementary European search will be based on the 
last set of claims filed up to expiry of this period for which any claims fee 
due is paid. 
The applicant may, but is not required to, reply to the WO-ISA, IPER or 
SISR drawn up by an authority other than the EPO, normally in the form of 
amendments and/or comments filed with Form 1200 or in response to a 
communication under Rule 161(2). If the applicant does reply to the 
WO-ISA, IPER or SISR, the supplementary search report and the search 
opinion will be drawn up taking this reply into account (see B-II, 4.3 and 
B-XI, 2). 
Art. 30(2) PCT 
Rule 94.2bis PCT 
Rule 94.3 PCT 
Rule 161(2) 
Part E – Chapter IX-24 

 
 
For proceeding directly to supplementary European search without having 
to wait until the six-month time limit under Rule 161(2) expires, applicants 
may explicitly waive their right to a communication pursuant to Rules 161(2) 
and 162. No communication under Rule 161(2) or 162 is issued if, in 
addition to the waiver, the applicant has already paid any claims fees due 
(see the notice from the EPO dated 5 April 2011, OJ EPO 2011, 354). If 
not, the communication will be issued and the application will be processed 
only after expiry of the six-month period, even if a request under the PACE 
programme has been filed (see E-VIII, 4). 
When preparing the first communication in examination for such cases, the 
examiner may have to consider the international search report (with the 
corresponding International Preliminary Report on Patentability (IPRP) or 
the 
International 
Preliminary 
Examination 
Report 
(IPER)), 
any 
supplementary international search report (SISR), any supplementary 
European search report (with the corresponding search opinion) prepared 
by the EPO (see B-II, 4.3) and any reply filed in response thereto 
(see C-II, 3.1). 
3.2 Applications for which no supplementary European search 
report is prepared 
Where the EPO has drawn up an international search report (ISR) or a 
supplementary international search report (SISR), no supplementary 
European search report is prepared (see the decision of the Administrative 
Council of 28 October 2009, OJ EPO 2009, 594, and B-II, 4.3.1, B-II, 4.3.2). 
In these cases, a written opinion of the ISA (WO-ISA) or a supplementary 
international search report (SISR) with explanations under 
Rule 
45bis.7(e) PCT and – if the EPO was also IPEA – an international 
preliminary examination report (IPER) will already have been transmitted to 
the applicant during the international phase. 
The applicant is required to respond to the WO-ISA or SISR prepared by 
the EPO or, where applicable, to the IPER prepared by the EPO as IPEA. 
This does not apply where amendments or observations have already been 
filed which can be considered to be a reply (subject to certain requirements, 
see E-IX, 3.3.1). The time limit for response is six months from the 
invitation according to Rule 161(1) and is not extendable. 
The communication under Rule 161(1) is issued promptly after expiry of the 
time limit for entry into the European phase and is combined with the 
communication under Rule 162(2) inviting the applicant to pay any claims 
fees due (see E-IX, 2.3.8). 
Failure to respond to the WO-ISA, SISR or IPER within this period (by filing 
amendments and/or comments) leads to the application being deemed to 
be withdrawn according to Rule 161(1) unless one of the exceptions 
described in E-IX, 3.3 applies. Further processing is available for this loss 
of rights (see E-VIII, 2). In all cases, the latest filed request on file after 
expiry of the time limit according to Rule 161(1) will then be taken into 
account when drafting the first communication (see E-IX, 4.3.2) or when 
issuing the invitation under Rule 164(2) (see C-III, 3.1), provided that the 
application is not deemed to be withdrawn. 
Rule 161(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-25 
 
In order to proceed with the examination of the application without having to 
wait until the expiry of the six-month time limit for response, applicants may 
explicitly waive their right to a communication pursuant to Rule 161(1) and 
Rule 162. Provided that, on entry into the European phase, they have also 
already responded, where required, to the WO-ISA, the IPER or the SISR 
and paid the claims fees, no communication under Rules 161 and Rule 162 
will be issued (see the notice from the EPO dated 5 April 2011, 
OJ EPO 2011, 354). If this is not the case, the communication will be 
issued and the application will be processed only after expiry of the 
six-month period, even in the presence of a request under the PACE 
programme (see E-VIII, 4). 
Where the EPO is an elected Office, the international preliminary 
examination report and the documents attached to it must be considered in 
accordance with E-IX, 4.3. 
Where a translation of the priority document is required (see A-III, 6.8 and 
F-VI, 3.4), an invitation to file it according to Rule 53(3) may be sent by the 
examining division only after the period according to Rule 161(1) has 
expired (see A-III, 6.8.2). 
3.3 Exceptions where a reply to the Rule 161(1) invitation is not 
required 
In certain cases, even though the EPO was the ISA or the SISA, the 
applicant is not required to respond to the communication under 
Rule 161(1). 
3.3.1 Earlier filed amendments or comments 
A reply to the communication under Rule 161(1) may not be necessary 
where amendments or observations have already been filed that can be 
considered to be a valid reply. This is the case in the following situations: 
(i) 
If the applicant has filed new amendments and/or comments upon 
entry into the regional phase before the EPO, provided that 
– 
the applicant has indicated on entry into the European phase 
that such amendments and/or comments are to form the basis 
for further prosecution of the application (see E-IX, 2.1.1), and 
– 
they constitute a valid response (see B-XI, 8). 
(ii) 
If the applicant filed amendments according to Art. 19 and/or 34 PCT 
in the international phase, and if the EPO prepared the WO-ISA or 
SISR but no IPER (either because the applicant did not demand PCT 
Chapter II or because the IPEA was an office other than the EPO), 
then these amendments are considered to constitute a response to 
the WO-ISA or SISR, provided that the applicant 
– 
has indicated on entry into the European phase that these 
amendments are maintained, 
Part E – Chapter IX-26 

 
 
– 
has provided a copy of the amendments under Art. 34 PCT, 
filed with the IPEA other than the EPO, as well as any 
necessary translations in the language of the proceedings. 
If amendments have been filed under Art. 19 or 34 PCT and have been 
taken into consideration in the drawing up of an IPER by the EPO acting as 
IPEA, these are not considered to constitute a response to the IPER as 
required by Rule 161(1); in these cases, the applicant is required to 
respond to the IPER within the six-month period according to Rule 161(1). 
If the requirements of Rule 137(4) were not fulfilled for amendments 
already filed, the required indications are to be made in reply to the 
Rule 161(1) communication (see E-IX, 3.4). 
In cases (i) and (ii) above, no communication under Rule 161(1) and 162 is 
issued if applicants have explicitly waived their right to these and have 
already paid any claims fees due (see E-IX, 3.2). 
3.3.2 Positive WO-ISA, SISR or IPER 
Where the WO-ISA, any supplementary international search report (SISR) 
or, where applicable, the subsequent IPER prepared by the EPO was 
positive (according to the same principles explained for European search 
opinions in B-XI, 3.9), the applicant is still sent a communication according 
to Rule 161(1), but is not required to respond to it. 
No communication under Rule 161(1) and 162 is issued if applicants have 
explicitly waived their right to these and have already paid any claims fees 
due (see E-IX, 3.2). 
3.3.3 Rule 161 communication issued before 1 April 2010 
In cases where the Rule 161 communication was already issued before 
1 April 2010, there is no requirement to respond to the WO-ISA prepared 
by the EPO or to the IPER prepared by the EPO as IPEA; if the applicant 
has not filed any amendments or comments upon entry into the regional 
phase before the EPO, the first communication will essentially be based on 
the content of said WO-ISA or IPER prepared by the EPO. 
3.3.4 Voluntary reply to Rule 161(1) communication 
In cases (i) and (ii) mentioned in E-IX, 3.3.1 and the case mentioned in 
E-IX, 3.3.2 where the applicants are not required to respond to the 
WO-ISA, SISR or IPER prepared by the EPO (in response to the invitation 
under Rule 161(1)), they may still do so by filing further amendments 
and/or comments if they so wish. Once again it is advisable that the 
requirements of Rule 137(4) are fulfilled for any such amendments when 
they are filed, thus avoiding a further communication according to 
Rule 137(4). 
3.4 Rule 137(4) applies 
In the case of Euro-PCT applications for which an international search 
report or supplementary European search report has been drawn up by the 
EPO since 1 April 2010, if amendments which are to form the basis for 
further examination were filed either during the Rule 161(1) time limit or 
Rule 137(4) 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-27 
 
earlier, the requirements of Rule 137(4) must be complied with (the 
amendments must be identified and the basis for them in the application as 
filed indicated). If the applicant has not yet complied with these 
requirements on expiry of the time limit according to Rule 161(1), the 
examining division may request him to provide this information within a 
period of one month, by issuing a communication according to Rule 137(4). 
Failure to respond to this communication in time will lead to the application 
being deemed to be withdrawn (see H-III, 2.1 and H-III, 2.1.1). The 
examining division may send a Rule 137(4) communication before sending 
a communication according to Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1), (2) or (3). 
Corresponding requirements exist for amendments made in the 
international phase (Rules 46.5, 66.8 and 70.2 PCT). 
4. Examination procedure 
4.1 At least one communication in examination 
If deficiencies persist in the application even after applicants have filed their 
response to the WO-ISA, supplementary international search report or 
IPER (as required by Rule 161(1)), the examining division will in general 
issue at least one communication according to Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1) 
and (2) in subsequent examination proceedings and will consider the 
applicant's reply thereto before issuing a decision or a summons to oral 
proceedings. This applies regardless of whether a communication 
according to Rule 164(2)(a) has been issued. In exceptional cases, 
summons to oral proceedings may be issued as the first action in 
examination proceedings (see C-III, 5). 
4.2 No examination of multiple inventions in EP phase 
Although under PCT Chapter II, where the EPO is the IPEA, the applicant 
can have multiple inventions examined in one IPER if further examination 
fees have been paid (or if the examiner has chosen not to invite the 
applicant to pay further fees), in the European procedure only one invention 
will be examined. 
In cases where protection is sought for an invention not covered by the 
(supplementary) international search report, by the supplementary 
European search report or by a search carried out under Rule 164(2) 
because the search fee due was not paid, the examining division must 
invite the applicant to limit the application to one invention covered by one 
of these searches. The procedure under Rule 164(2) is set out in detail in 
C-III, 3.1. 
If after receipt of the (supplementary) European search report or, where 
applicable, after a communication under Rule 164(2)(b) the applicant files 
amended claims relating to an invention which differs from any of the 
originally claimed inventions and which does not combine with these 
inventions to form a single inventive concept, an objection under 
Rule 137(5) is raised (see also F-V, 7 and H-IV, 4). 
Rule 164(2) 
Rule 137(5) 
Part E – Chapter IX-28 

 
 
4.3 Substantive examination of a Euro-PCT application accompanied 
by an IPER 
The substantive examination is conducted in the same way as with any 
other European applications. Where the EPO was the International 
Preliminary Examining Authority, the international preliminary examination 
will normally have been carried out by the examiner responsible for 
examining the related Euro-PCT application. 
The application to be examined will be accompanied by an international 
preliminary examination report drawn up in one of the official languages of 
the EPO. New documents in the original language may be attached in 
annex to the report (Art. 36(3)(a) PCT and Rule 70.16 PCT). The 
application will also be accompanied by a translation of the annexes, 
transmitted by the applicant, in the same language into which the 
international 
preliminary 
examination 
report 
was 
translated 
(Art. 36(3)(b) PCT). 
The examination must be conducted in accordance with Art. 41 and 
42 PCT, which stipulate that: 
(i) 
the applicant must be given the opportunity to amend the claims, the 
description and the drawings within a time limit prescribed pursuant 
to Rule 78.1(b) PCT (see also Rules 159(1)(b) and 161); and 
(ii) 
the EPO cannot require that the applicant furnish copies, or 
information on the contents, of any papers connected with the 
examination relating to the same application in any other elected 
Office. 
4.3.1 Comparative test results 
Where the EPO has established the IPER and refers therein to the 
submission of test reports, applicants are taken to agree to the use of these 
reports as the basis for proceedings before the EPO when they use the 
standard form for entry into the European phase before the EPO as elected 
Office, i.e. Form 1200. If the latter is not used or the IPER – referring to the 
test reports – was established by another International Preliminary 
Examination Authority, the applicant is invited to submit these reports for 
the European application. 
4.3.2 Basis for substantive examination 
Normally, the documents which are indicated in the international 
preliminary examination report as forming the basis for that report will also 
form the basis for the substantive examination in the EPO as an elected 
Office in the European phase. New documents (claims, description, 
drawings) submitted during the international preliminary examination and 
replacing the earlier filed documents will be attached to the international 
preliminary examination report. If the documents attached to the 
international preliminary examination report are in a language other than 
the language of the proceedings of the European application in the 
European phase, the applicant must be requested to file the documents in 
the language of the proceedings within a fixed period. 
Art. 14(1) 
Art. 41 and 42 PCT 
Rule 159(1)(b) 
Rule 161 
 

Part E – Chapter IX-29 
 
The applicant may also request that the examination be based on the 
documents in the international application as published or on amendments 
made on entry into the European phase. If the declarations of the applicant 
are unclear in this respect, the examiner will have to clarify the situation. 
4.3.3 Consideration of the contents of the IPER 
If the international preliminary examination report has been drawn up by the 
EPO, it is to be regarded as an opinion for purposes of examination, and 
generally the first communication will be based on the opinion expressed in 
the IPER and the applicant's response to it filed in accordance with 
Rule 161(1) (if applicable, see E-IX, 3). Such an opinion may be departed 
from if new facts relevant to assessing patentability are in evidence (e.g. if 
further prior-art documents are to be cited or if evidence is produced of 
unexpected effects), where the substantive patentability requirements 
under the PCT and the EPC are different, where applicants provide 
convincing 
arguments, 
appropriate 
amendments 
or 
relevant 
counter-evidence in their response to the IPER according to Rule 161(1), or 
conversely where the applicant provides amendments in response to the 
IPER which introduce further deficiencies. 
Examination reports drawn up by other International Preliminary Examining 
Authorities must be examined carefully. If the reasons put forward in the 
international preliminary examination report are sound, they must not be 
disregarded. 
Rule 161(1) 
Rule 159 
 

Part E – Chapter X-1 
 
Chapter X – Decisions 
1. Basic principles of decisions 
1.1 General remarks 
Decisions subject to appeal are taken by the Receiving Section, the 
examining divisions, the opposition divisions and the Legal Division. Unless 
otherwise specified, the principles described in this chapter apply to all 
such decisions. They also apply to decisions taken by formalities officers to 
whom this work is entrusted (see the decisions of the President of the EPO 
dated 12 December 2013, OJ EPO 2014, A6, and 23 November 2015, 
OJ EPO 2015, A104). 
According to Art. 113(1), decisions of the EPO may only be based on 
grounds or evidence on which the parties concerned have had an 
opportunity to present their comments. 
This provision is intended to ensure that no party can be taken by surprise 
by grounds for a decision against their application on which they did not 
have an opportunity to present their comments. 
1.2 Consideration of time limits 
A decision may not be given until any time limit set has expired unless all 
the parties affected by the time limit expressly agree that it need no longer 
be observed or have submitted their final opinions before it expires. The 
decision to grant a patent may, however, be given once the applicant is 
deemed to have approved the text submitted to him under Rule 71(5) and 
has fulfilled all other formal requirements, even if the time limit set in the 
Rule 71(3) communication has not yet expired. 
Moreover, as a rule, decisions will not be given until an internal EPO time 
limit (e.g. 20 days) following upon the official time limit (but from which the 
parties may derive no rights) has expired, so as to ensure that documents 
received at the end of the period officially allowed have actually been 
entered in the files when the decision is being taken and can be taken into 
account in the decision. 
With reference to submissions and applications received after expiry of a 
time limit, see E-VIII, 1.8. 
1.3 Form and content 
Decisions are to be produced in writing. The same applies to decisions 
delivered at the end of oral proceedings (see E-III, 9). 
No complete rules can be laid down about the form and content of 
decisions, which will depend on the requirements of each particular case. 
The written decision will contain: 
– 
the names of the parties to the proceedings (applicant, proprietor, 
opponents) and, if applicable, their representatives; 
Art. 106(1) 
Art. 113(1) 
Part E – Chapter X-2 

 
 
– 
the order (operative part), and, if necessary; 
– 
the facts and submissions; 
– 
the reasoning; 
– 
the communication of the possibility of appeal (Rule 111(2)); and 
– 
the signature(s) and the name(s) of the employee(s) responsible. 
Even in those cases in which the decision contains no communication of 
the means of redress, an appeal can be filed if the decision is incorrect, 
e.g. if the grant was not made on the basis of the documents that the 
applicant had approved. 
If the decision is produced by the employee responsible using a computer, 
the EPO seal may replace the signature. If it is produced automatically by a 
computer the employee's name may also be dispensed with (Rule 113(2)). 
1.3.1 Order 
The order (or "operative part") of the decision, must clearly state the 
request of the parties and the extent to which this request is complied with 
(T 756/14). It may be, for example, as follows: 
"The European patent application ... is hereby refused pursuant to 
Art. 97(2) EPC."; 
"The opposition to the European patent ... is hereby rejected."; or 
"The request for re-establishment of rights is hereby rejected". 
1.3.2 Facts and submissions 
Facts and submissions have to be given in so far as they are significant for 
the decision. 
Under facts, a brief description of the case and a summary of the main 
reasons on which the decision is based and of the most important replies of 
the parties is given. These points, however, are to be covered in detail in 
the subsequent reasoning. 
1.3.3 Reasoning 
The statement of grounds must first set out and substantiate the reasons 
for the decision, citing the individual EPC articles and rules involved. 
For decisions taken by the examining or opposition division, see E-X, 2.6. 
The deciding instance will draft the decision based on one or more grounds 
forming the basis of the decision, as appropriate. It is essential that the 
parties have been given an opportunity to comment on all the grounds on 
which the decision is based. 
Rule 113(1) 
 

Part E – Chapter X-3 
 
When several grounds are used in the decision, it is imperative to link them 
in a logical way, in particular avoiding having a subsequent ground 
contradict an earlier one. Furthermore, the chain of grounds must be 
structured so that it starts with the main ground. 
All significant arguments advanced by a party to the proceedings are 
carefully examined and comprehensively discussed in the decision. 
In individual cases, consideration may also be given to the reasoning of 
those decisions which merely meet the requests of the parties. If, for 
example, a number of reasons are invoked for a request for 
re-establishment, of which only one justifies re-establishment, a reasoned 
decision on re-establishment may be appropriate, in order to clarify the 
official action. 
2. Decisions taken by the examining or opposition divisions 
In substantive examination, applicants must have an opportunity of 
presenting their comments on all the grounds invoked against their 
application. 
Before an application is refused by the examining division, the search 
under Art. 54(3) is completed (see also C-IV, 7.1). 
In opposition proceedings, if the patent is to be revoked, it must be ensured 
that the proprietor of the patent in particular is given sufficient opportunity to 
defend himself and, similarly, if the oppositions are to be rejected or if, 
despite the claims of the opponents, the patent is to be maintained in 
amended form, the opponents in particular must be given the same 
opportunity. A decision may be based on grounds indicated in a document 
from one of the parties, provided the document has been sent to the other 
parties so that they have had an opportunity to comment. 
If more than two months have elapsed between despatch of the document 
"only for information" and the issue of the decision, this generally means 
that parties have had sufficient opportunity to comment and their right to be 
heard has therefore not been infringed (T 263/93). 
If the patent is to be maintained in amended form, there must be a text of 
the claims and description which has been approved by the patent 
proprietor (D-VI, 2), and the opponent(s) must have had an opportunity to 
comment on it. 
2.1 Right to be heard 
The right to be heard is a right not just to present comments but also to 
have those comments duly considered. Amendments and arguments 
submitted by a party need to be considered, and the party must be given an 
opportunity to comment on the grounds and evidence brought forward by 
the examining division (see T 1123/04 and T 852/07). A document may not 
be cited for the first time in a decision (see T 635/04) unless it has been 
introduced during oral proceedings. The use of fresh arguments in a 
decision still based on grounds and evidence communicated beforehand is 
not precluded (see T 268/00 and T 1557/07). 
Part E – Chapter X-4 

 
 
If a case is remitted from the boards of appeal for further prosecution, the 
examining division must check whether requests from examination 
proceedings prior to the appeal are still outstanding and must give the party 
an opportunity to comment (see T 1494/05). If the facts and grounds 
essential to a decision have been submitted by one party and if the party 
whose case is to be rejected has been afforded sufficient time to comment, 
the principle concerning the right to be heard set out in Art. 113(1) will have 
been respected. If the decision in opposition proceedings is to be based on 
grounds which were raised in the examination proceedings but not in the 
notice of opposition, the observations by the parties or the communications 
of the opposition division, these must be introduced (i.e. raised for 
discussion) by the opposition division in the opposition proceedings before 
the decision is given so as to afford the parties an opportunity to comment. 
If the opposition is based on lack of inventive step, the proprietor of the 
patent must expect that the prior art newly designated in the opposition 
proceedings will be considered in conjunction with the prior art described in 
the introductory part of an independent claim. However, if new facts and 
grounds are introduced during the proceedings or if the facts and grounds 
on which the envisaged decision is to be based were not stated so 
unambiguously and clearly in the written submissions of the parties as to 
give a party occasion to comment, the party concerned must be given an 
opportunity to submit an opinion and to produce evidence before the 
decision is given. 
A patent proprietor's right to be heard has not however been violated if, by 
making only minor amendments to the claims in response to a 
communication from the opposition division setting out the material 
arguments against maintaining the patent as it stands, the result is that the 
grounds for revoking the patent remain essentially unchanged, provided the 
proprietor's comments have been duly considered. 
In such a case, where the obstacles to maintenance have already been put 
to the proprietor and continue to apply, the patent may be revoked 
immediately, without any need to communicate again the full arguments on 
which the decision would be based. 
2.2 Authoritative text of documents 
The EPO must decide upon the European patent application or the 
European patent only in the text submitted to it, or agreed, by the applicant 
or proprietor and last used as a basis for the proceedings. Consequently, 
for example, an amended version proposed by the examining or opposition 
division (see C-V, 1.1, D-VI, 4.2 and 7.2.1) may only be adopted as a basis 
for the decision if it has been approved by the applicant or proprietor. 
In the case of one or more auxiliary requests directed to alternative texts for 
grant or maintenance of a patent, every such request qualifies as a text 
submitted or agreed by the applicant or proprietor within the meaning of 
Art. 113(2) (see T 234/86), and therefore must be dealt with in the order 
indicated or agreed to by the applicant or proprietor, up to and including the 
highest-ranking allowable request, if any. 
Art. 113(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter X-5 
 
When considering such requests it is essential that they are treated in the 
correct order. Thus, for instance, if the only allowable request is an auxiliary 
request, but is accompanied by a higher auxiliary request for oral 
proceedings (e.g. a request that oral proceedings be held if the main 
request cannot be granted) then a communication under Rule 71(3) could 
not be issued on the basis of the allowable request, but instead oral 
proceedings in accordance with the higher request would have to be 
appointed, 
or 
a 
further 
communication 
under 
Rule 71(1) 
issued 
(see E-X, 2.9). If the order of the requests is not clear from the applicant's 
submissions, then it would be necessary to contact the applicant to clarify 
the situation before proceeding. 
2.3 Requirements as to form 
Decisions taken by the examining or opposition divisions have to adhere to 
the principles laid down in E-X, 1. Where a decision is produced by means 
of a computer, the file copy contains the names and the actual signature(s) 
of the employee(s) responsible. 
If, exceptionally, one or more division members cannot sign the decision, 
e.g. owing to extended illness, only a division member who was present at 
the oral proceedings (preferably the chair) may sign it on their behalf 
(see T 243/87). However, in such a situation, a brief written explanation as 
to why one member is signing on behalf of another must be provided 
(T 2348/19). A written decision signed by someone who did not take part in 
the oral proceedings at which the decision was pronounced is not legally 
valid (see T 390/86). 
The presentation of the facts and the submissions, the reasoning and the 
communication of the means of redress are generally omitted when a 
decision merely meets the requests of all the parties concerned; this 
applies in particular to the decision to grant, which is based on the 
documents that the applicant has approved (Rule 71(5)). The same applies 
when the patent is maintained in an amended form, because this is 
preceded by a final interlocutory decision pursuant to Art. 106(2) 
concerning the documents on which the maintenance of the patent is to be 
based (see D-VI, 7.2.2). 
The decision must be drafted using only the language of proceedings in 
order to meet the requirements of Rule 111(2). Arguments of parties in 
another official language must be summarised in the language of 
proceedings. Deviation is possible in exceptional cases only, such as 
where necessary to address questions of fact, evidence or law, for example 
in relation to witness statements. 
2.4 Facts and submissions 
For general aspects relating to facts and submissions, see E-X, 1.3.2. 
Facts and submissions which are irrelevant to the decision, e.g. requests 
for amendment which are not maintained, are to be omitted. It must be 
ensured that the facts and submissions are consistent with the contents of 
the minutes of oral proceedings (also see E-III, 10.3). 
Rule 111(1) 
Part E – Chapter X-6 

 
 
The facts and submissions must clearly indicate what is the subject of the 
application and show on which documents the decision is based. In 
examination, this requirement is achieved by including a detailed reference 
to the application documents which are subject to the decision, including, in 
particular, any amendments to the claims or to the description as well as 
maintained auxiliary requests. In addition, the examining division may cite 
the text of any important claim(s) or passages of the description in the 
decision. In opposition, the text of the independent claim(s) and other 
especially important claims or passages of the description on which the 
decision is based must be cited verbatim in the language of the 
proceedings (Rule 3(2)) either by copying the text into the decision or 
annexing a copy of the claims. As regards the dependent claims, it may be 
sufficient to refer to the file content. 
2.5 Decision on the file as it stands 
Applicants may request a decision "on the file as it stands" or "according to 
the state of the file", e.g. when all arguments have been sufficiently put 
forward in the proceedings and the applicant is interested in a speedy 
appealable decision. C-V, 15 and subsections, describes the procedure to 
be followed in case of such a request. 
2.6 Reasoning of decisions 
If the division is of the opinion that no patent can be granted, it will 
substantiate this in a decision citing the individual EPC articles and rules 
involved. For important general aspects relating to the reasoning of 
decisions, see the example below and E-X, 1.3.3. 
Example: 
Often an application lacking an inventive step also lacks clarity. The 
decision must clearly set whether the application is refused because the 
subject-matter of the claims is unclear and would also lack inventive step 
once clarified or whether it is refused because the subject-matter of the 
claims lacks inventive step and would have to be clarified once the 
inventive step objection is overcome. 
The reasoning for each of the grounds on which the decision is based must 
contain, in logical sequence, those arguments which justify the order. It 
must be complete and independently comprehensible, i.e. generally without 
references. If, however, a question has already been raised in detail in a 
particular communication contained in the file, the reasoning of the decision 
may be summarised accordingly and reference may be made to the 
relevant communication for the details. 
The conclusions drawn from the facts and evidence, e.g. publications, must 
be made clear. In particular, there must be consistency between the 
reasons and the facts as set out in the decision and in the minutes (also 
see E-X, 2.4). The parts of a publication which are important for the 
decision must be cited in such a way that those conclusions can be 
checked without difficulty. Therefore, reference is made to each particular 
passage in the publication. It is not sufficient, for example, merely to assert 
Art. 113(1) 
Rule 111(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter X-7 
 
that the cited publications show that the subject of a claim is known or 
obvious, or, conversely, do not cast doubt on its patentability. 
The arguments put forward by the examiner during the proceedings form 
the "skeleton" for the decision and already define a complete and unbroken 
chain of reasoning leading to refusal. The decision may be based only on 
reasons already communicated to the applicant (Art. 113(1)). The 
applicant's arguments must be dealt with either point by point at the 
appropriate juncture in the chain of reasoning or en bloc at the end. The 
latter approach is often preferable as it makes clear that the final result is 
based solely on reasons already communicated to the applicant in 
compliance with Art. 113(1). In the part refuting the applicant's arguments, 
the decision must make clear why none of those arguments persuaded the 
examining division to depart from the final result. 
It is particularly important that special attention be paid to important facts 
and arguments which may speak against the decision made. If not, the 
impression might be given that such points have been overlooked. 
Documents which cover the same facts or arguments may be treated in 
summary form, in order to avoid unnecessarily long reasoning. 
The need for complete and detailed reasoning is especially great when 
dealing with contentious points which are important for the decision; on the 
other hand, no unnecessary details or additional reasons need to be given 
which are intended to provide further proof of what has already been 
proven. 
The decision is a standalone document and must include the statement that 
the application is refused. This serves to indicate that, in case of several 
grounds, all of them form the basis for the refusal. 
The decisions will not contain any matter on which the parties have not had 
an opportunity to comment. 
2.7 Content 
The decision normally deals with all independent claims of the valid 
request(s) that were discussed during the proceedings. A single ground is 
enough to refuse an application, so it is not always necessary to deal with 
all the dependent claims. If however a particular dependent claim has been 
discussed, the decision includes the relevant arguments. 
Any additional requests still outstanding must be dealt with in the refusal 
decision. If, for example, new oral proceedings were requested in 
circumstances where Art. 116(1), second sentence, applies, the decision 
must give the reasons for rejecting that request. 
Formulations implying doubt or uncertainty, such as "seems" or 
"apparently", must be avoided in decisions. 
2.8 Analysing the parties' arguments 
All significant arguments advanced by a losing party to the proceedings are 
carefully examined and comprehensively refuted in the decision. The 
Part E – Chapter X-8 

 
 
decision must substantiate the division's view that none of the submitted 
arguments overcome the objections it has raised. 
However, facts not in dispute need be mentioned only briefly. Arguments by 
the parties which are clearly irrelevant to the issues involved do not need to 
be discussed. 
2.9 Main and auxiliary requests 
If during examination proceedings a main and auxiliary requests have 
been filed (see E-X, 2.2) and none of these is allowable, the reasons for the 
decision to refuse the application pursuant to Art. 97(2) must not be limited 
to the main request, but must also comprise the reasons for the 
non-allowability of each auxiliary request. If one of the requests is 
allowable, the communication pursuant to Rule 71(3) is to be issued on the 
basis of the (first) allowable request and must be accompanied by a brief 
indication of the essential reasons why the higher-ranking requests are not 
allowable or not admissible (see C-V, 1.1). If the applicant, in response to 
the communication pursuant to Rule 71(3), maintains higher-ranking 
requests which are not allowable or not admissible, a decision to refuse the 
application 
pursuant 
to 
Art. 97(2) 
will 
normally 
be 
issued 
(see C-V, 4.7 and 4.6.2); the reasons must set out the grounds for the 
non-allowability or non-admissibility of each request which ranks higher 
than the allowable request. In respect of the allowable request, the decision 
to refuse must mention that applicants have failed to give their approval to 
it. 
Similarly, if in opposition proceedings the proprietor has submitted in 
addition to the main request one or more auxiliary requests, none of which 
is allowable, the patent must be revoked and the decision must set out, in 
respect of each request submitted and maintained by the proprietor, the 
reasons for not allowing it. Where one of the proprietor's requests directed 
to the maintenance of the patent in amended form is allowable, an 
interlocutory decision is to be issued on the basis of the (first) allowable 
request; it has to set out the reasons why this request meets the 
requirements of the EPC and, additionally, the reasons why the 
higher-ranking requests do not. 
In so far as a decision includes the rejection of any of the multiple requests, 
such decision may not be taken until the applicant or proprietor has been 
informed, with respect to each of these requests, of the reasons for not 
allowing them, so that the applicant or proprietor is not deprived of the 
opportunity to present comments (Art. 113(1) – right to be heard). Similarly, 
an opportunity to comment must be granted to the opponent(s) with respect 
to an auxiliary request before it is held allowable by an interlocutory 
decision (see D-VI, 7.2). 
Practical considerations will determine at which point in the decision the 
auxiliary request is dealt with. 
2.10 Late-filed submissions 
If an examining or opposition division has exercised its discretion under 
Art. 114(2) or Rule 116 to refuse late-filed facts, evidence or requests, its 
Art. 114(2) 
Rule 116 
 

Part E – Chapter X-9 
 
decision must give the reasons for its refusal. A mere reference to the 
discretionary power given under Art. 114(2) or Rule 116 is not sufficient 
(see T 755/96). For details on how to exercise this discretion, see E-VI, 2 
and H-II, 2.7. 
2.11 Refusal to admit amendments under Rule 137(3) 
When, in exercising its discretion under Rule 137(3), the examining division 
refuses to admit amended claims, it must give reasons for so doing. For 
details on how to exercise this discretion, see H-II, 2.3 and H-II, 2.7. 
If no other requests are on file, then there is no text agreed by the applicant 
and the application is to be refused under Art. 113(2). 
3. Decisions which do not terminate proceedings – interlocutory 
decisions 
A decision that does not terminate the proceedings as regards one of the 
parties is termed an interlocutory decision. An interlocutory decision can 
only be appealed together with the final decision unless it allows separate 
appeal. 
The competent department will use its discretion as to the need for an 
interlocutory decision (see, however, D-VI, 7.2.2 with respect to the 
interlocutory decision for maintenance of a patent in amended form in 
opposition proceedings). To avoid fragmentation of the proceedings, such 
decisions will be the exception rather than the rule and will be given only if 
the duration or cost of the proceedings as a whole is thereby reduced. The 
interests of the parties will also be borne in mind as appropriate. 
In the normal course, an interlocutory decision will be contemplated only for 
the purpose of ruling that separate appeal may be made, as only in this 
way can a decision be obtained on a preliminary point before the final 
decision terminating the proceedings is reached. (The proceedings must be 
suspended until the decision has become final.) It is especially important to 
allow separate appeal where the continuation of the proceedings depends 
on a preliminary ruling on a fundamental point of law, e.g. where different 
boards of appeal have given different rulings or conflicting decisions have 
been given by different examining or opposition divisions and no decision 
on appeal has been given in the matter. 
Interlocutory decisions must state the reasons on which they are taken 
(see E-X, 1.3.3). 
If it is decided not to allow separate appeal, the reasons for this ruling may 
be given in the final decision instead. 
A ruling to allow a separate appeal must be part of the order of the decision 
(E-X, 1.3.1) (T 756/14). 
4. Binding nature of decisions on appeals 
If a department has to give a decision in a case which has already been 
remitted by the board of appeal for further prosecution to that department, it 
is bound by the ratio decidendi of the board of appeal, in so far as the facts, 
Rule 137(3) 
Art. 106(2) 
Art. 111(2) 
Part E – Chapter X-10 

 
 
e.g. the subject-matter of the patent and the relevant state of the art, are 
the same. 
An opposition division is not bound by a decision of a board of appeal on 
appeal against a decision from an examining division (see T 167/93). The 
exclusive phrasing of the last sentence of Art. 111(2), only mentioning the 
examining division being bound by the decision on appeal against a 
decision of the Receiving Section, makes this clear. Opposition 
proceedings are entirely separate from the examination proceedings, and 
the opposition division is entitled to examine the facts, evidence and 
arguments anew, particularly since another party (the opponent) is now 
involved. It, however, takes due notice of the assessment of these facts, 
evidence and arguments as contained in the reasons of the decision of the 
board of appeal. 
5. 
Information as to means of redress 
Decisions of the EPO which are open to appeal must be accompanied by a 
written communication of the possibility of appeal. The communication must 
also draw the attention of the parties to the provisions laid down in Art. 106 
to 108 and Rules 97 and 98, the text of which must be attached. The 
parties may not invoke the omission of the communication. 
6. 
Notification 
Decisions must be notified as a matter of course (see E-II, 2). 
7. 
Expiry of the term of the European patent 
According to Art. 63(1), the term of the European patent is 20 years from 
the date of filing of the application. Under specific circumstances the 
contracting states can extend that term (Art. 63(2)). 
The expiry of the 20-year term does not have an effect on the pendency of 
the European patent application. An applicant may still have a legitimate 
interest in the grant of the patent in view of provisional protection provided 
for in Art. 67(1). This means that examination of the application must 
continue unless the applicant withdraws the application or allows it to lapse 
by not responding to a communication issued by the examining division. 
An opposition or an appeal can be filed even if the European patent has 
been surrendered or has lapsed in all contracting states (see D-I, 2 and 
E-XII, 2 respectively). For the effect of the expiry of the 20-year term on 
pending opposition proceedings, see D-VII, 5.1. 
Similarly, a request for limitation or revocation can be filed after the expiry 
of the term of the European patent. 
Rule 111(2) 
Art. 119 
Art. 63 
Art. 89 
Rule 75 
Rule 84 
Rule 98 
 

Part E – Chapter XI-1 
 
Chapter XI – Impartiality of divisions 
Members of the competent divisions may not take part in the decision on a 
case: 
(i) 
in which they may have any personal interest (partiality for subjective 
reasons) or 
(ii) 
in respect of which the party may have good reasons to suspect 
partiality (partiality for objective reasons). 
For the objection to be admissible it must be raised immediately after the 
party has become aware of the reason for it. The request must also be 
accompanied by a reasoned statement of grounds setting out the facts and 
arguments in support of the objection and, where appropriate, any 
evidence. Unsubstantiated and merely general statements, e.g. based on 
the nationality of the examiner(s) concerned, are not admissible. 
Any challenge to impartiality must be submitted to the competent division, 
which will forward it to the responsible superior of the members of the 
division along with the statement of the member(s) concerned on the facts 
and circumstances put forward by the party. The responsible superior will 
decide on the challenge and issue a reasoned decision in writing. 
If the challenge to impartiality has been raised in written proceedings and 
has been considered allowable, the concerned member(s) of the division 
is/are replaced. If the challenge has been considered either inadmissible or 
not allowable, the proceedings will continue. In either case, the superior's 
decision will be communicated to the parties as an annex to a 
communication from the division or to the division's decision, and will be 
referred to in the facts and submissions part of division's decision. 
If the challenge to impartiality is raised in oral proceedings, the proceedings 
are interrupted in order for the responsible superior to assess the 
challenge. On the same day, the oral proceedings are resumed and the 
parties are informed on the outcome of the assessment. If the superior 
considers the challenge allowable, the oral proceedings are then 
adjourned. Proceedings will be continued by a division in which the 
concerned member(s) is/are replaced. If the responsible superior holds that 
the challenge to impartiality is either inadmissible or not allowable, the 
division will inform the parties accordingly and the oral proceedings will 
continue. In either case, the superior's decision will be communicated to the 
parties, normally as an annex to the division's decision, and will be referred 
to in the facts and submissions part of that decision. 
 

Part E – Chapter XII-1 
 
Chapter XII – Appeals 
1. Suspensive effect 
This chapter deals in detail only with those questions which are relevant for 
interlocutory revision. At this stage of the proceedings the department of 
first instance is still competent. 
Appeals shall lie from decisions of the Receiving Section, Examining 
Divisions, Opposition Divisions and the Legal Division. 
An appeal has suspensive effect. This means that decisions may not yet 
become final and their effects are suspended. As the decision may not then 
be enforced, the following do not take place: entry in the Register of 
European Patents, mention in the European Patent Bulletin and, where 
appropriate, publication of a new specification of the European patent. 
2. Appeals after surrender or lapse of the patent 
An appeal may be filed against the decision of the opposition division even 
if the European patent has been surrendered or has lapsed for all the 
designated states. 
3. Appeals against the apportionment of costs 
The apportionment of costs of opposition proceedings cannot be the sole 
subject of an appeal. Parties to the proceedings who feel that they have 
been adversely affected by the apportionment of costs may therefore only 
file an appeal against the decision on costs if they also lodge an appeal 
against the decision on the opposition on other admissible grounds. 
4. Appeals against the decision of the opposition division on the 
fixing of costs 
In accordance with Rule 97(2), the decision of the opposition division fixing 
the amount of costs of opposition proceedings may be appealed if the 
amount is in excess of the fee for appeal. 
5. Persons entitled to appeal and to be parties to appeal 
proceedings 
Any party to proceedings adversely affected by a decision may appeal. Any 
other parties to the proceedings are parties to the appeal proceedings as of 
right. 
6. Time limit and form of appeal 
Notice of appeal must be filed with the EPO within two months of the date 
of notification of the decision appealed from. It must contain the name and 
the address of the appellant as provided in Rule 41(2)(c), an indication of 
the decision impugned and a request defining the subject of the appeal. 
The notice is not deemed to have been filed until after the fee for appeal 
has been paid in the amount laid down in the Rules relating to Fees under 
the EPC. For appeals filed on or after 1 April 2018 by natural persons and 
entities referred to in Rule 6(4) and (5), i.e. small and medium-sized 
enterprises, non-profit organisations, universities and public research 
organisations, a reduced fee for appeal is payable, provided that a 
Art. 23(3) 
Art. 109 
Art. 106(1) 
Rule 98 
Rule 97(1) 
Rule 97(2) 
Art. 13 RFees 
Art. 107 
Art. 108 
Rule 99(1) 
Rule 6(4), (5) 
Part E – Chapter XII-2 

 
 
declaration of entitlement is filed at the latest by the time of payment of the 
reduced fee (see the notice from the EPO dated 18 December 2017, 
OJ EPO 2018, A5). 
Within four months after the date of notification of the decision, a written 
statement setting out the grounds of appeal must be filed. In the statement 
of grounds of appeal, the appellant must indicate the reasons for setting 
aside the impugned decision or the extent to which it is to be amended and 
the facts and evidence on which the appeal is based. 
7. 
Interlocutory revision 
7.1 General remarks 
If the department whose decision is contested considers the appeal to be 
admissible and well founded, it must rectify its decision. This does not apply 
where the appellant is opposed by another party to the proceedings. 
The obligation or possibility of rectification may thus arise in connection 
with a decision by the Receiving Section, the Legal Division, an examining 
division or exceptionally an opposition division if all oppositions were 
withdrawn and the proprietor has filed an appeal. 
After receipt of the statement of grounds, only three months are available 
for rectification of the decision by the department of the first instance. That 
department must therefore consider the appeal with the highest priority and 
start the examination on admissibility immediately, and if the appeal is 
considered admissible in the form in which it has been filed, the competent 
department will start its examination on allowability immediately. 
The department concerned will rectify its decision if convinced in the light of 
the grounds of appeal that the appeal is admissible and well founded. This 
could arise, for example, because: 
(i) 
the department failed to take due account of some of the material 
available to it at the time the decision was made; 
(ii) 
the department did not receive material filed at the EPO in due time 
before the issue of the decision, owing to an office error; or 
(iii) 
the decision of the department concerned does not appear to be 
incorrect, but the applicant presents new information or evidence or 
files amendments to the application, which overcome the objections 
of the decision under appeal (see T 139/87). 
For the advantages of a decision covering more than one objection, 
see E-X, 2.6. 
In either case, whether the appealed decision is rectified or the appeal is 
remitted to the board, a decision issued by the examining or opposition 
division may be signed only by the examiners belonging to the division at 
the time of signature. If an examiner is absent for a long period or has left 
the department, a new member must be appointed to the division. 
Rule 99(2) 
Art. 109(1) 
Art. 109(2) 
 

Part E – Chapter XII-3 
 
7.2 Remittal to the board of appeal 
If the appeal is not allowed within three months after receipt of the 
statement of grounds, it must be remitted to the competent board of appeal 
without delay, and without comment as to its merit. This means that the 
department of first instance does not address any comments of substance 
to the board. Internal notes made by division members about the merits of 
the appeal are kept in the non-public part of the dossier and are not sent to 
the board of appeal. 
The receipt of the statement of grounds of appeal is a prerequisite for the 
examining division when deciding whether the appeal is well-founded. Such 
statements can be filed at any time within four months from the notification 
of the decision (Art. 108). Therefore, the examining division will wait until all 
the grounds are received before deciding whether to allow interlocutory 
revision or to remit the appeal to the board to ensure that the full content of 
the statement of grounds has been received. 
7.3 Reimbursement of appeal fees 
In the event of interlocutory revision, reimbursement of appeal fees will be 
ordered by the department whose decision has been impugned if such 
reimbursement is equitable by reason of a substantial procedural violation. 
This is particularly the case when essential facts or evidence were not 
taken into consideration in arriving at a decision, e.g. where a document 
filed at the EPO in good time by the party concerned is not placed in the file 
before a decision is reached or where the decision is based on facts or 
evidence on which the parties concerned had no opportunity of presenting 
their comments. The appeal fee is to be reimbursed, even if this was not 
explicitly requested by the appellant (see G 3/03). 
If the decision is rectified by an interlocutory revision not because of any 
substantial procedural violation but e.g. because the party concerned 
submits amendments at the time of filing the appeal, there will be no 
reimbursement of appeal fees. 
If the department whose decision is contested considers the requirements 
of Art. 109 for interlocutory revision to be fulfilled, but not the requirements 
of Rule 103(1)(a) for reimbursement of the appeal fee, it must rectify its 
decision and remit the request for reimbursement of the appeal fee to the 
board of appeal for a decision (see J 32/95). 
The request for reimbursement of the appeal fee will be remitted to the 
board of appeal only if it was filed together with the appeal (see G 3/03 and 
T 21/02). 
7.4 Examples 
7.4.1 No amended claims filed with the appeal 
If the applicant has filed an appeal but no amended claims, the division 
checks whether the decision was correct in substance. Interlocutory 
revision is only allowed if the decision was not correct in substance. A 
refund of the appeal fee is to be ordered if a substantial procedural violation 
has occurred (see E-XII, 7.3). If interlocutory revision is made and new 
Art. 109(2) 
Rule 103(1)(a) 
Art. 109 
Part E – Chapter XII-4 

 
 
objections arise, the division communicates these objections to the 
applicant as often as necessary to reach a final decision on the file; this 
could include holding oral proceedings (again) and/or a second refusal. 
Example: 
The applicant points out in the letter of appeal that the examining division 
has overlooked a request for oral proceedings. 
The examining division looks at the file and notes that this was indeed the 
case: interlocutory revision must be made, even if it results in a further 
refusal after oral proceedings have been held. The appeal fee must be 
refunded. 
7.4.2 Amended main/single request filed with the appeal 
If amendments clearly overcome the grounds for refusal, interlocutory 
revision is granted even if further new objections arise. This is because the 
applicant has the right to examination in two instances (see T 219/93). 
Important criteria are (see T 47/90): 
1. 
the text is no longer the same 
2. 
substantial amendments have been made. 
"Substantial" amendments overcome grounds for refusal vis-à-vis the 
documents already cited in the decision (e.g. example (d) below). 
The examiner has the discretion to decide whether, in each particular case, 
the amendments to the claims are such that examination has to be 
continued on a new basis, e.g. where a completely new line of 
inventive-step argumentation would be necessary. 
In arriving at this decision, the examiner takes into account all the grounds 
mentioned in the original decision, including the main or supporting 
arguments already raised in previous objections to patentability to which 
the applicant has had an opportunity to respond and to which reference is 
made in the grounds of refusal (e.g. objections mentioned in previous 
communications, during personal consultation or at oral proceedings). This 
is in the interest of procedural efficiency and to the benefit of the applicant 
(no second appeal fee necessary, see T 2445/11). 
If amendments made to the independent claims clearly do not meet the 
requirements of Art. 123(2), interlocutory revision is not granted, but the 
division sends the file to the boards of appeal. If there are doubts as to 
whether the amendments meet the requirements of Art. 123(2) or the 
amendments clearly meet the requirements of Art. 123(2), the division 
checks whether the amended claims overcome the ground(s) for refusal as 
indicated above. 
 

Part E – Chapter XII-5 
 
Examples: 
(a) 
The applicant has included a wording that has already been 
suggested by the examiner, the new claims are ready for grant but 
the description needs to be adapted: interlocutory revision must be 
granted since the grounds for the refusal have been overcome. 
(b) 
Refusal for lack of novelty only. New claims are clearly novel but 
not inventive. The question of inventive step had not been raised in 
the decision or in the previous procedure: there must be an 
interlocutory revision. 
(c) 
Refusal for lack of novelty. New claim 1 filed which includes a 
feature from dependent claim 3. This claim had already been 
discussed in the decision and was considered not to be inventive: no 
interlocutory revision. 
(d) 
Refusal for lack of novelty over D1. New claim 1 filed which 
includes a feature from the description. This feature had not been 
previously discussed per se; however, it is clearly disclosed in D1: no 
interlocutory revision since the ground for refusal – lack of novelty 
over D1 – has not been overcome. 
(e) 
Refusal for lack of inventive step vis-à-vis D1 and D2. New 
claims filed which include a feature from the description. This feature 
had not been previously discussed, but is clearly disclosed in D1, 
and therefore there is no change in the argumentation given: no 
interlocutory revision since the ground for refusal – lack of inventive 
step vis-à-vis D1 and D2 – has not been overcome. 
(f) 
Refusal for lack of inventive step vis-à-vis D1 and D2. New claim 
filed which includes five new features from the description. These 
features have not been previously discussed. The examiner notes 
that 
although 
these 
features 
are 
disclosed 
in 
D2, 
the 
lack-of-inventive-step argumentation would have to be revised: 
interlocutory revision is allowed, since (i) the applicant has made 
substantial amendments to overcome the objections raised in the 
decision and (ii) the line of argumentation has to be revised. 
(g) 
Refusal for novelty vis-à-vis D1. New claims filed which clearly 
relate to unsearched subject-matter and which do not combine with 
the original searched claims to form a single general inventive 
concept: no interlocutory revision because said claims cannot be 
allowed in the proceedings. 
7.4.3 Main and auxiliary requests filed with the appeal 
Interlocutory revision is never possible on the basis of an auxiliary request, 
even if an auxiliary request would overcome the grounds for the decision 
(T 919/95). 
Part E – Chapter XII-6 

 
 
Example: 
The main request is the same as the one refused (i.e. not amended). 
However, the auxiliary request corresponds to a suggestion made by the 
examining division and would thus be allowable. There can be no 
interlocutory revision since the applicant has the right to have the main 
request examined by the boards of appeal. 
7.4.4 Response to communication pursuant to Rule 58 filed with the 
appeal 
If, in response to the Receiving Section's refusal of the application pursuant 
to Art. 90(5), the related deficiencies are fully rectified so as to overcome 
the grounds for refusal, interlocutory revision is granted by the Receiving 
Section. 
Example: 
On the date of filing, the drawings did not comply with the requirements set 
by the President under Rule 49(2). The application was subsequently 
refused (Art. 90(5)) since the applicant filed the same poor-quality drawings 
in reply to the communication under Rule 58. When filing an appeal 
complying with the requirements of Art. 108, the applicant also files 
drawings of sufficient quality, thereby correcting the deficiency on which the 
refusal was based. Since the underlying ground for the refusal has been 
overcome and the reasoning in the decision under appeal no longer 
applies, the Receiving Section grants interlocutory revision and does not 
refer the case to the boards of appeal. 
8. 
Rules of Procedure of the Boards of Appeal 
Details of the procedure before the boards of appeal, including on the 
acceleration of appeal proceedings, can be found in the Rules of Procedure 
of the Boards of Appeal (see OJ EPO 2019, A63, as amended by 
OJ EPO 2021, A19). The Enlarged Board of Appeal has also adopted 
Rules of Procedure (see OJ EPO 2015, A35). 
9. 
Remittal to the examining or opposition division after appeal 
If a decision by an examining or opposition division is appealed, the board 
of appeal may remit the case to the division under Art. 111(1). In such 
cases, the exact wording of the orders must be complied with. Various 
situations may arise: 
(a) 
The case is remitted for grant or maintenance in amended or limited 
form on the basis of a complete text which has been finally decided 
by the board. 
(b) 
The case is remitted for the description to be brought into line with 
claims whose wording has been finally decided by the board. 
(c) 
The case is remitted for further prosecution. 
In situation (a) above, grant or maintenance is handled by the formalities 
officer. The division provides input by verifying the classification and title 
 

Part E – Chapter XII-7 
 
and adding any references to supplementary technical information (STIN) 
or newly cited documents (CDOC). The examining division also carries out 
a top-up search for national prior rights and provides information about 
whether any are found to be prima facie relevant, if this has not already 
been done in the proceedings. This information may assist the applicant in 
deciding whether to request Unitary Patent protection or choose the 
traditional validation route (C-IV, 7.2). 
If the applicant requests further amendments under Rule 71(6), the 
application will be deemed withdrawn under Rule 71(7) as the procedure 
under Rule 71(6) cannot be applied in view of Art. 111(2).  
Where the case is remitted with the order to grant, or maintain, the patent 
on the basis of documents with handwritten amendments, the formalities 
officer on behalf of the competent division invites the applicant, or 
proprietor, to file a formally compliant version of the amended text under 
Art. 94(3) or Rule 82(2), as the case may be (see E-III, 8.7.2 and E-III, 8.7.3 
respectively). 
In situation (b) above, the board has taken a final decision on the wording 
of the claims which ends the matter. The division can no longer amend the 
claims or allow the applicant or proprietor to do so, even if new facts 
(e.g. new relevant citations) come to light (see T 113/92, Headnote No. 2, 
and T 1063/92, Headnote, second paragraph). Corrections under Rule 139, 
however, may still be allowable. 
Applicants and proprietors should exercise all possible procedural economy 
when bringing the description into line with the claims' wording as decided 
by the board of appeal. Normally, therefore, completely retyped texts will 
not be accepted (see T 113/92, Headnote No. 1). 
In situation (c) above, the division whose decision was appealed is bound 
by the board's ratio decidendi, in so far as the facts are the same 
(Art. 111(2)). However, new relevant documents or facts which come to 
light must be taken into account. In particular: 
– 
the parties must be given the opportunity to submit further requests, 
and 
– 
the division must check whether requests from examination or 
opposition proceedings prior to the appeal (e.g. for oral proceedings) 
are still outstanding – see T 892/92, Headnote. 
 

Part E – Chapter XIII-1 
 
Chapter XIII – Request from a national court for 
a technical opinion concerning a European 
patent 
1. General 
At the request of the competent national court trying an infringement or 
revocation action, the EPO is obliged, against payment of an appropriate 
fee, to give a technical opinion concerning the European patent which is the 
subject of the action. The examining divisions are responsible for the issue 
of such opinions. 
Only requests from a national court in a contracting state will be accepted 
by the EPO. It is not, however, up to the EPO to check whether the 
requesting court is "competent" to deal with the action or not. The 
examining division, however, checks whether a European patent is the 
"subject of the action". 
The examining division responsible for the technical opinion gives the 
parties an opportunity to submit arguments in writing if the court so permits. 
However, the parties have no right to be heard before the EPO. 
Nevertheless, where the examining division considers it necessary, it may 
invite the parties, via the court and provided that the court so permits, either 
to be heard before the examining division or to submit supplementary 
observations on specific points identified by the examining division. If the 
parties are heard, such a hearing is not considered to constitute oral 
proceedings within the meaning of Art. 116. 
The technical opinion is not a decision of the EPO. The parties to the 
national proceedings therefore have no right of appeal before the EPO 
against an unfavourable opinion. 
2. Scope of the technical opinion 
The examining division is obliged to give a "technical opinion" upon 
request. This means that the division is bound to give an opinion only in so 
far as the questions put are of a technical character. However, the 
examining division may not be too restrictive in this regard but will attempt 
to assist the national court as much as is reasonably possible, while 
remembering that the actual decision on infringement or revocation is 
exclusively a matter for the national court. 
Generally speaking, the examining division attempts to give a technical 
opinion on any question which is similar to those normally dealt with in 
European substantive examination work, even when the question has a 
legal, as well as a technical, aspect. On the other hand, the examining 
division will decline to make any specific statement on whether a patent is 
valid or on whether it is infringed. It also does not give any opinion on the 
extent of protection (Art. 69 and the accompanying Protocol). 
A request from a national court is to be expected to be clearly and precisely 
formulated, so that the examining division will be in no doubt as to the 
questions on which the court wishes to have an opinion. Since the court is 
Art. 25 
Part E – Chapter XIII-2 

 
 
responsible for deciding the issues of law involved in the questions and 
since most questions include a mixture of legal and technical aspects, the 
court is expected where possible to separate clearly the legal aspects from 
the technical aspects upon which it seeks the opinion of the EPO. 
3. 
Composition and duties of the examining division 
3.1 Composition 
The composition of the examining division to which the request is referred 
must be as defined in Art. 18(2). This means that the division must include 
three technical examiners; normally a legally qualified examiner will also be 
included. The main responsibility for dealing with the request up to the time 
of formulating the opinion is entrusted to one technical examiner, 
hereinafter referred to as the "primary examiner". 
In order to guarantee that the opinion given is not influenced by earlier 
proceedings within the EPO on the application/patent in question, 
examiners who have taken part in such earlier proceedings as members of 
an examining or opposition division will be excluded from the examining 
division set up under Art. 25. Where this is not practicable, the national 
court and the parties are informed of the proposed members of the 
examining division under Art. 25 and of which among these members 
participated in European examination or opposition proceedings on the 
case. The court will be asked to state whether, in the circumstances, the 
request for a technical opinion is maintained. 
3.2 Duties 
The primary examiner will act on behalf of the examining division and will 
normally be responsible for issuing communications to the court. The 
primary examiner also drafts the written opinion and circulates the draft to 
the other members of the examining division for consideration. If any 
changes are proposed in the draft and there are differences of view on 
such changes, the chair arranges a meeting to resolve the matter. The final 
opinion is signed by all members of the division. 
4. 
Language to be used 
In principle the language to be used is the language of the proceedings of 
the European patent; however, if the court so requests, another official 
language of the EPO may be used. At least the request itself, any 
submissions from the parties, and any amendments to the patent must be 
in that language or translated into that language. The opinion is also 
produced in that language. However, where appropriate, the examining 
division will pay regard to the provisions of Art. 70(2) to (4). 
Regarding documents to be used as evidence, the provisions of Rule 3(3) 
apply (see A-VII, 3). 
The court or the parties are responsible for providing any translations which 
may be required to satisfy the above conditions. 
5. 
Procedure 
It is envisaged that the procedure will normally involve the following stages. 
 

Part E – Chapter XIII-3 
 
5.1 Formalities check 
The formalities officer will check whether the fee has been paid and 
whether there are any obvious deficiencies as to the language 
requirements. If there are any deficiencies in these respects, the formalities 
officer will write to the national court informing it that no substantive work on 
the opinion will begin until the deficiencies have been remedied. However, 
no time limit can be imposed on the court. 
If the file indicates that the court permits the parties to submit written 
arguments to the EPO and such arguments are not already on the file, the 
formalities officer will write via the court to the parties giving them a time 
limit (say two months) for submitting such arguments. 
5.2 Preliminary examination 
When the formal requirements have been met, and, where appropriate, the 
arguments of the parties are on file, the case will be referred to the 
directorate responsible for the technical field of the patent in order for the 
examining division to be established. Assuming that an examining division 
consisting entirely of new members can be formed or, where this is not 
possible, that the court maintains its request for a technical opinion 
(see E-XIII, 3.1), the primary examiner will perform a preliminary 
examination to determine whether: 
(i) 
the questions put by the national court are such as the examining 
division is competent to answer, at least in part; and 
(ii) 
the papers filed are sufficiently complete and the necessary 
translations have also been filed. 
If there are any deficiencies in these respects, the primary examiner will 
write to the national court accordingly. 
5.3 Withdrawal of the request 
If the request for a technical opinion is withdrawn before the examining 
division starts any substantive work on the opinion, 75% of the fee will be 
refunded. 
5.4 Establishment and issue of the technical opinion 
After any deficiencies as referred to in E-XIII, 5.1 or E-XIII, 5.2, above have 
been met, the examining division establishes the technical opinion as soon 
as possible. 
The opinion is sent to the national court. Any papers received from the 
court which belong to the national proceedings are sent back with the 
opinion. 
5.5 File inspection 
The file of a request for a technical opinion is not a file within the meaning 
of Art. 128 and is not available for file inspection. 
Art. 2(1), 
item 20, RFees 
Art. 10 RFees 
Part E – Chapter XIII-4 

 
 
5.6 Appearance before the national court 
If, after the opinion is issued, the national court asks the examining division 
to appear before it, the court is informed that the EPO is willing to send one 
member of the division provided that costs are paid and on the 
understanding that this member will be required only to answer questions 
on the technical opinion given and will not be required to give an opinion on 
additional matters unless notice in writing of these additional matters is 
given to the examining division at least one month before the appearance 
before the court. 
 

Part E – Chapter XIV-1 
 
Chapter XIV – Registration of changes of name, 
transfers, licences and other rights 
1. General 
Pursuant to Rules 22 to 24 and 85 in conjunction with Rule 143(1)(w), 
rights and transfer of such rights relating to an application or a European 
patent are registered in the European Patent Register. 
Transfers and changes of name are recorded as particulars of the applicant 
in accordance with Rule 143(1)(f). 
2. Responsible department 
The Legal Division of the EPO bears the sole responsibility for these 
registrations (see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 600). 
The Legal Division may entrust specific duties which do not require legal 
expertise to formalities officers (see the decision of the President of the 
EPO dated 21 November 2013, OJ EPO 2013, 601). 
3. Transfer of the European patent application 
A European patent application may be transferred for one or more of the 
designated contracting states. 
Art. 72 is an autonomous provision which exclusively governs the formal 
requirements of such transfers. The EPO registers a transfer of rights in 
respect of a pending European patent application (see A-IV, 1.1.1 and 
J 10/93) in the European Patent Register on request, upon fulfilment of the 
prerequisites of Rule 22. The request is not deemed to have been filed until 
an administrative fee has been paid. The amount of the fee is determined 
by the latest schedule of fees and expenses of the EPO (see epo.org). 
Where the request relates to multiple applications, a separate fee has to be 
paid for each application. 
With effect from the entry into force of amended Rule 22(1) on 1 April 2024, 
the conditions under which payment of an administrative fee is due is laid 
down by the President of the EPO.  
Rule 22 furthermore requires the production of documents providing 
evidence of such a transfer. Any kind of written evidence suitable for 
proving the transfer is admissible. This includes formal documentary proof 
such as the instrument of transfer itself (the original or a copy thereof) or 
other official documents or extracts thereof, provided that they immediately 
verify the transfer (J 12/00). Art. 72 requires that, for an assignment, the 
signatures of the parties appear on the documents submitted as evidence 
of the transfer. Assignment documents filed electronically (see A-II, 1.1.1) 
may, instead of handwritten signatures, bear qualified electronic signatures 
(see notice from the EPO dated 22 October 2021; OJ EPO 2021, A86). 
Art. 20 
Art. 71 
Art. 72 
Rule 22(1) and 
(2) 
Part E – Chapter XIV-2 

 
 
With effect from the entry into force of amended Rule 22(1) on 1 April 2024, 
electronic signatures as determined by the President of the EPO are 
accepted on assignment documents. 
Where a document is signed on behalf of a legal person, only such persons 
as are entitled to sign by law, by the legal person's articles of association or 
equivalent or by a special mandate may do so. National law applies in that 
respect. In all cases, an indication of the signatory's entitlement to sign, 
e.g. his/her position within the legal entity where the entitlement to sign 
results directly from such a position, is to be given. The contracting parties 
have to ensure that the signatories are duly authorised in accordance with 
the national law applicable to sign such a document. The EPO, however, 
reserves the right to request documentary proof of the signatory's authority 
to sign if the circumstances of a particular case necessitate this. In such 
cases, if the evidence presented is found to be unsatisfactory, the EPO 
informs the party requesting the transfer accordingly and invites them to 
remedy the stated deficiency within a given time limit. 
As a general rule, the authorisation to represent a party in proceedings 
before the EPO within the meaning of Rule 152, be it an individual or a 
general authorisation, is not as such considered to empower the 
representative to enter into such a contract. 
If the request complies with the requirements of Rule 22(1), the transfer is 
registered with the date on which the request, the required evidence or the 
fee has been received by the EPO, whichever is the latest. In case of a 
minor deficiency, i.e. if all requirements were present but not fulfilled 
completely (e.g. the request was signed but the name and/or position of the 
person signing were missing), once rectified the effective date is the date of 
receipt of the original request for registration. 
On the above date, the transfer becomes effective vis-à-vis the EPO, 
i.e. from that date the newly registered applicant is entitled to exercise the 
right to the European patent application in proceedings before the EPO 
(Art. 60(3)). If the transfer was for certain designated states only, Art. 118 
applies. 
Once a transfer has been duly entered in the European Patent Register, 
the registration cannot be undone, even if it appears that one or more 
requirements were actually not fulfilled for reasons not apparent at the time 
when the transfer was registered by the EPO, e.g. where doubts arise later 
as to the entitlement of the person signing on behalf of one of the parties to 
enter such a transfer agreement (see decisions J 16/14 to J 22/14). The 
original status quo is no longer restored until the valid legal situation has 
been established. In the meantime, proceedings may have to be stayed 
under Rule 14 or 78 until it is clear who the legitimate applicant/proprietor 
is. 
4. Transfer of the European patent 
Rule 22 applies mutatis mutandis to the registration of a transfer of the 
European patent during the opposition period or during opposition 
proceedings. 
Rule 22(3) 
Art. 20 
Rule 85 
 

Part E – Chapter XIV-3 
 
5. Changes of name 
Mere changes of name, i.e. changes that do not involve a modification of 
the legal identity of the applicant, can be entered in the European Patent 
Register upon request and production of relevant documentary evidence as 
long as the application (cf. A-IV, 1.1.1) or the proceedings before the EPO 
are pending. Such registration is free of charge. 
6. Licences and other rights 
6.1 Registration 
A European patent application may give rise to rights in rem, may be 
licensed and may be the subject of legal means of execution. This includes 
contractual licences only (Art. 73). Licences and other rights may be 
geographically limited to parts of the territories of the designated 
contracting states only. 
In the case of co-applicants, the registration of licences requires the 
consent of each of the co-applicants. 
Rule 22(1) and (2) apply mutatis mutandis to the registration of the grant, 
establishment or transfer of such rights (see E-XIV, 3). 
A licence will be recorded in the European Patent Register as an exclusive 
licence if the applicant and the licensee so require. A licence will be 
recorded as a sub-licence where it is granted by a licensee whose licence 
is recorded in the European Patent Register. 
6.2 Cancellation of the registration 
A registration of licences or other rights is cancelled upon request, 
supported by documents providing evidence that the right has lapsed or by 
the written consent of the proprietor of the right to the cancellation of that 
right. Rule 22(2) applies mutatis mutandis, i.e. the cancellation is subject to 
the payment of an administrative fee. Cancellation is only possible until 
publication of the mention of the grant.  
Art. 71 
Art. 73 
Rule 23(1) 
Rule 24(a) and 
(b) 
Rule 22(2) 
Rule 23(2) 
 
 
Part F – Chapter I-1 
 
Chapter I – Introduction 
Apart from the requirements of patentability (novelty, inventive step, 
industrial application and exclusions from patentability), a European patent 
application must also satisfy a number of other requirements. These 
include substantive requirements such as sufficiency of disclosure (Art. 83), 
clarity of the claims (Art. 84) and unity of invention (Art. 82) as well as 
requirements of a more formal nature such as the numbering of the claims 
(Rule 43(5)) and the form of the drawings (as determined by the President 
under Rule 49(2)). These requirements are dealt with in the present Part F. 
Part F also deals with the requirements relating to the right to priority. This 
is because, despite the fact that this issue is usually assessed only when it 
has a potential bearing on a question of patentability (see G-IV, 3), it is 
nonetheless assessed independently of any issues of patentability. 
 

Part F – Chapter II-1 
 
Chapter II – Content of a European patent 
application (other than claims) 
1. General 
The requirements for a European patent application are set out in Art. 78. 
The application must contain: 
(i) 
a request for the grant of a European patent; 
(ii) 
a description of the invention; 
(iii) 
one or more claims; 
(iv) 
any drawings referred to in the description or the claims; and 
(v) 
an abstract. 
This Chapter deals with all these requirements, in so far as they are the 
concern of the search or examining division, with the exception of item (iii) 
which is the subject of Chapter F-IV. Item (v) is dealt with first. 
2. Abstract 
2.1 Purpose of the abstract 
The application must contain an abstract. The purpose of the abstract is to 
give brief technical information about the disclosure as contained in the 
description, claims and any drawings. The abstract is merely for use as 
technical information and in particular cannot be used for the purpose of 
interpreting the scope of the protection sought. The abstract needs to be 
drafted so that it constitutes an efficient instrument for searching in the 
particular technical field and for evaluating if it is worth considering the 
whole content of the application. 
2.2 Definitive content 
The abstract is initially supplied by the applicant. The search division has 
the task of determining its definitive content, which will normally be 
published with the application. In doing this, it considers the abstract in 
relation to the application as filed (see B-X, 7(i)). If the search report is 
published later than the application, the abstract, published with the 
application will be the one resulting from the examination referred to in 
B-X, 7(i), third sentence. 
In determining the definitive content, the search division takes into 
consideration the purpose of the abstract (see F-II, 2.1). 
2.3 Content of the abstract 
The abstract must: 
(i) 
indicate the title of the invention 
(ii) 
indicate the technical field to which the invention pertains; 
Art. 78 
Art. 78(1)(a) 
Art. 78(1)(b) 
Art. 78(1)(c) 
Art. 78(1)(d) 
Art. 78(1)(e) 
Rule 57(d) 
Rule 47(5) 
Rule 66 
Rule 68 
Art. 85 
Rule 47(5) 
Rule 47(1) 
Rule 47(2) 
Part F – Chapter II-2 

 
 
(iii) 
contain a concise summary of the disclosure as contained in the 
description, the claims and any drawings, which must be so drafted 
as to allow a clear understanding of the technical problem, the gist of 
the solution of that problem through the invention and the principal 
use or uses of the invention and, where applicable, it should contain 
the chemical formula which, among those contained in the 
application, best characterises the invention; 
(iv) 
not contain statements on the alleged merits or value of the invention 
or its speculative application; 
(v) 
preferably not contain more than one hundred and fifty words; and 
(vi) 
if the application contains drawings, be accompanied by an indication 
of the figure or exceptionally more than one figure of the drawings 
which should accompany the abstract. Each main feature mentioned 
in the abstract and illustrated by a drawing needs to be followed by a 
reference sign in parenthesis. 
2.4 Figure accompanying the abstract 
The search division considers not only the text of the abstract but also the 
selection of the figures for publication with it. It alters the text to the extent 
that this may be necessary in order to meet the requirements set out in 
F-II, 2.3. The search division will select a different figure, or figures, of the 
drawings if it considers that they better characterise the invention. 
The search division may prevent the publication of any drawing with the 
abstract, where none of the drawings present in the application is useful for 
the understanding of the abstract. This can be done even when the 
applicant has requested that a particular drawing or drawings be published 
with the abstract according to Rule 47(4). 
In determining the content of the abstract, the search division concentrates 
on conciseness and clarity, and refrains from introducing alterations merely 
for the purpose of embellishing the language (see B-X, 7). 
2.5 Checklist 
In considering the abstract, the search division checks it against the 
General Guidelines for the Preparation of Abstracts of Patent Documents, 
using the checklist contained in WIPO Standard ST.12, the relevant parts of 
which are annexed to this Chapter (F-II, Annex 1). 
2.6 Transmittal of the abstract to the applicant 
The content of the abstract is transmitted to the applicant together with the 
search report (see B-X, 7(i)). 
2.7 Abstract in examination 
The general considerations relating to the abstract are set out in F-II, 2.1 to 
F-II, 2.6. The abstract relates to the application as filed and published and 
its final form for publication is determined by the search division. It is not 
necessary to bring it into conformity with the content of the published patent 
even if this should differ in substance from that of the application, since the 
Rule 47(2) 
Rule 47(2) 
Rule 47(3) 
Rule 47(4) 
Rule 47(4) 
Rule 66 
Art. 98 
 

Part F – Chapter II-3 
 
patent specification does not contain an abstract. The examining division 
therefore does not seek any amendment of the abstract. 
The abstract has no legal effect on the application containing it; for 
instance, it cannot be used to interpret the scope of protection or to justify 
the addition to the description of new subject-matter. 
3. Request for grant – the title 
The items making up this request are dealt with in A-III, 4. They do not 
normally concern the search division or the examining division, with the 
exception of the title. 
The title should clearly and concisely state the technical designation of the 
invention and should exclude all fancy names (see A-III, 7.1). While any 
obvious failures to meet these requirements are likely to be noted during 
the formalities examination (and possibly during the search, see B-X, 7(ii)), 
the search division or the examining division reviews the title in the light of 
its reading of the description and claims and any amendments thereto, to 
make sure that the title is concise and gives a clear and adequate 
indication of the subject of the invention. Thus, if amendments are made 
which change the categories of claims, the examining division checks 
whether a corresponding amendment is needed in the title. 
4. Description (formal requirements) 
4.1 General remarks 
The application must disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently clear 
and complete for it to be carried out by a person skilled in the art. 
The "person skilled in the art" for this purpose is considered to be the 
skilled practitioner in the relevant field aware not only of the teaching of the 
application itself and the references therein, but also of what was common 
general knowledge in the art at the date of filing (date of priority) of the 
application. They are assumed to have at their disposal the means and the 
capacity for routine work and experimentation, which are normal for the 
technical field in question. As "common general knowledge" can generally 
be considered the information contained in basic handbooks, monographs 
and textbooks on the subject in question (see T 171/84). As an exception, it 
can also be the information contained in patent specifications or scientific 
publications, if the invention lies in a field of research which is so new that 
the relevant technical knowledge is not yet available from textbooks 
(see T 51/87). Sufficiency of disclosure must be assessed on the basis of 
the application as a whole, including the description, claims and drawings, if 
any. The provisions relating to the content of the description are set out in 
Rule 42. The purpose of the provisions of Art. 83 and Rule 42 is: 
(i) 
to ensure that the application contains sufficient technical information 
to enable a skilled person to put the invention as claimed into 
practice; and 
(ii) 
to enable the skilled person to understand the contribution to the art 
which the invention as claimed has made. 
Art. 85 
Rule 41(2)(b) 
Art. 83 
Rule 42 
Part F – Chapter II-4 

 
 
4.2 Technical field 
The invention should be placed in its setting by specifying the technical field 
to which it relates, for example by reproducing the first ("prior art") portion 
of the independent claims in full or in substance or by simply referring to it. 
If claims are amended, the "field of the invention" and "summary of the 
invention" may also need to be amended to correspond to the claims. If 
appropriate, it is possible to use statements like "the invention is set out in 
the appended set of claims" instead of repeating the claims verbatim. 
4.3 Background art 
The description should also mention any background art of which the 
applicant is aware, and which can be regarded as useful for understanding 
the invention and its relationship to the prior art; identification of documents 
reflecting such art, especially patent specifications, should preferably be 
included. This applies in particular to the background art corresponding to 
the first ("prior art") portion of the independent claim or claims 
(see F-IV, 2.2). 
In principle, when filing an application the applicant should cite in the 
description the closest prior art known to them. It may happen that the prior 
art cited by the applicant is not the closest existing for the claimed 
invention. Therefore, the documents cited in the application as filed do not 
necessarily describe the known innovations closest to the claimed 
invention, but may in fact constitute more distantly related prior art. 
The insertion into the statement of prior art of references to documents 
identified during examination may be necessary to put the invention into 
proper perspective (see T 11/82). For instance, while the originally filed 
description of prior art may give the impression that the inventor has 
developed the invention from a certain point, the cited documents may 
show that certain stages in, or aspects of, this alleged development were 
already known. In such a case the examining division requires a reference 
to these documents and a brief summary of the relevant contents. The 
subsequent inclusion of such a summary in the description does not 
contravene Art. 123(2). The latter merely lays down that, if the application is 
amended, for example by limiting it in the light of additional information on 
the background art, its subject-matter must not extend beyond the content 
of the application as filed. But the subject-matter of the European patent 
application within the meaning of Art. 123(2) is to be understood – starting 
off from the prior art – as comprising those features which, in the framework 
of the disclosure required by Art. 83, relate to the invention (see also 
H-IV, 2.1). In addition, relevant prior-art documents not cited in the original 
application may be subsequently acknowledged in the description even if 
these were known to the applicant at the time of filing (T 2321/08 and 
H-IV, 2.2.7). 
References to the prior art introduced after filing must be purely factual. 
Any alleged advantages of the invention must be adjusted if necessary, in 
the light of the prior art. 
Rule 42(1)(a) 
Rule 42(1)(b) 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter II-5 
 
New statements of advantage are permissible provided that they do not 
introduce into the description matter which extends beyond the content of 
the application as filed (see H-V, 2.2). 
The applicant may cite documents in the application which relate to 
standard technical knowledge (background art neither addressing the same 
technical problem nor necessary to complete the disclosure of the claimed 
invention). Such citations typically relate to well-known tests for measuring 
certain parameters mentioned in the description or to the definitions of 
terms of established meaning that are used in the application. Usually they 
are not relevant for assessing the patentability of the claimed invention, 
unless for example they contain relevant information which the applicant 
does not mention in the description. 
Acknowledgment of prior art relevant to the dependent claims only is 
generally not required. If the applicant indicates that subject-matter initially 
cited as prior art is only "in-house state of the art", such prior art may not be 
used 
in 
the 
assessment 
of 
novelty 
and 
inventive 
step 
(see 
T 654/92, Reasons 4, and T 1001/98, Reasons 3). However, it may be 
allowed to remain in the description, provided the fact that it is only 
"in-house state of the art" is made clear. 
If the relevant prior art consists of another European patent application 
falling within the terms of Art. 54(3), this relevant prior document belongs to 
the state of the art for all contracting states. This is the case even if the two 
applications do not share any commonly designated state, or the 
designation 
of 
commonly 
designated 
states 
has 
been 
dropped 
(see G-IV, 6). The fact that this document falls under Art. 54(3) must be 
explicitly acknowledged. Thus the public is informed that the document is 
not relevant to the question of inventive step (see G-VII, 2). According to 
Rule 165, the above also applies to international applications designating 
EP, for which the filing fee pursuant to Rule 159(1)(c) has been validly paid 
and, where applicable, the translation into one of the official languages has 
been filed (Art. 153(3) and (4)) (see G-IV, 5.2). 
For transitional provisions concerning the applicability of Art. 54(4) 
EPC 1973, see H-III, 4.2. 
4.3.1 Format of background art citations 
In citing documents or inserting references, applicants and examining 
divisions alike must use codes that allow the references to be retrieved 
without difficulty. This can be best achieved through consistent use of the 
WIPO standards format: 
(i) 
for non-patent literature, WIPO Standard ST.14 (Recommendation 
for the Inclusion of References Cited in Patent Documents); 
(ii) 
for patent literature (applications, granted patents and utility models): 
for the two-letter country code, WIPO Standard ST.3 (Recommended 
Standard on Two-Letter Codes for the Representation of States, 
Other Entities and Intergovernmental Organizations); for symbols 
indicating 
the 
type 
of 
document, 
WIPO 
Standard 
ST.16 
Art. 54(3) 
Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 
Part F – Chapter II-6 

 
 
(Recommended Standard Code for the Identification of Different 
Kinds of Patent Documents). 
WIPO standards: 
ST.14 (wipo.int/export/sites/www/standards/en/pdf/03-14-01.pdf)  
ST.3 (wipo.int/export/sites/www/standards/en/pdf/03-03-01.pdf) 
ST.16 (wipo.int/export/sites/www/standards/en/pdf/03-16-01.pdf) 
These can be found on the WIPO website. 
However, in the case of deviation from these standards there is no need to 
correct the codes used, as long as straightforward retrieval of the citation(s) 
is possible. 
4.3.1.1 Examples of quotation for non-patent literature 
(i) 
For a monograph: 
WALTON Herrmann, Microwave Quantum Theory. London: Sweet 
and Maxwell, 1973, Vol. 2, pages 138 to 192. 
(ii) 
For an article in a periodical: 
DROP, J.G. Integrated Circuit Personalization at the Module Level. 
IBM tech. dis. bull. October 1974, Vol. 17, No. 5, pages 1344 and 
1345. 
(iii) 
For a separately published abstract: 
Chem. abstr., Vol. 75, No. 20, 15 November 1971 (Columbus, Ohio, 
USA), page 16, column 1, abstract No. 120718k, SHETULOV, D.I. 
"Surface Effects During Metal Fatigue," Fiz.-Him. Meh. Mater. 1971, 
7(29), 7-11 (Russ.). 
Patent Abstracts of Japan, Vol. 15, No. 105 (M-1092), 13 March 
1991, JP 30 02404 A (FUDO). 
4.3.1.2 Examples of quotation for patent literature 
(i) 
JP 50-14535 B (NCR CORP.) 28 May 1975 (28.05.75), column 4, 
lines 3 to 27. 
(ii) 
DE 3744403 A1 (A. JOSEK) 29.08.1991, page 1, abstract. 
4.4 Irrelevant matter 
Since the skilled person is presumed to have the general technical 
background knowledge appropriate to the art, the examining division does 
not require the applicant to insert anything in the nature of a treatise or 
research report or explanatory matter which is obtainable from textbooks or 
is otherwise well-known. Likewise the examining division does not require a 
detailed description of the content of cited prior documents. It is sufficient 
that the reason for the inclusion of the reference is indicated, unless in a 
particular case a more detailed description is necessary for a full 
Rule 48(1)(c) 
 

Part F – Chapter II-7 
 
understanding of the invention of the application (see also F-III, 8 and 
F-IV, 2.3.1). 
A list of several reference documents relating to the same feature or aspect 
of the prior art is not required; only the most appropriate need be referred 
to. On the other hand, the examining division does not insist upon the 
excision of any such unnecessary matter, except when it is very extensive 
(see F-II, 7.4). 
4.5 Technical problem and its solution 
The invention as claimed should be disclosed in such a way that the 
technical problem, or problems, with which it deals can be appreciated and 
the solution can be understood. To meet this requirement, only such details 
should be included as are necessary for elucidating the invention. 
As an example, to elucidate the nature of the solution according to the 
independent claims, either the characterising portion of the independent 
claims could be repeated or referred to, or the substance of the features of 
the solution according to the relevant claims could be reproduced (see 
F-II, 4.2). 
In cases where the subject-matter of a dependent claim can be understood 
either by the wording of the claim itself or by the description of a way of 
performing the invention, no additional explanation of this subject-matter 
will be necessary. A mention in the description that a particular embodiment 
of the invention is set out in the dependent claim will then be sufficient. 
When there is doubt, however, as to whether certain details are necessary, 
the examining division does not insist on their excision. It is not necessary, 
moreover, that the invention be presented explicitly in problem-solution 
form. Any advantageous effects which the applicant considers the invention 
to have in relation to the prior art should be stated, but this should not be 
done in such a way as to disparage any particular prior product or process. 
Furthermore, neither the prior art nor the applicant's invention should be 
referred to in a manner likely to mislead. This might be done e.g. by an 
ambiguous presentation which gives the impression that the prior art had 
solved less of the problem than was actually the case. Fair comment as 
referred to in F-II, 7.3 is, however, permitted. Regarding amendment to, or 
addition of, a statement of problem, see H-V, 2.4. 
4.6 Rule 42(1)(c) vs. Art. 52(1) 
If it is decided that an independent claim defines a patentable invention 
within the meaning of Art. 52(1), it must be possible to derive a technical 
problem from the application. In this case the requirement of Rule 42(1)(c) 
is fulfilled (see T 26/81). 
4.7 Reference in the description to drawings 
If drawings are included they should first be briefly described, in a manner 
such as: "Figure 1 is a plan view of the transformer housing; Figure 2 is a 
side elevation of the housing; Figure 3 is an end elevation looking in the 
direction of the arrow X of Figure 2; Figure 4 is a cross-section taken 
through AA of Figure 1." When it is necessary to refer in the description to 
Rule 42(1)(c) 
Rule 48(1)(b) 
Rule 42(1)(c) 
Rule 42(1)(d) 
Part F – Chapter II-8 

 
 
elements of the drawings, the name of the element should be referred to as 
well as its number, i.e. the reference should not be in the form: "3 is 
connected to 5 via 4" but, "resistor 3 is connected to capacitor 5 via 
switch 4". 
4.8 Reference signs 
The description and drawings need to be consistent with one another, 
especially in the matter of reference numbers and other signs, and each 
number or sign must be explained. However, where as a result of 
amendments to the description whole passages are deleted, it may be 
tedious to delete all superfluous references from the drawings and in such 
a case the examining division does not pursue an objection under 
Art. 1(2)(i) of the decision of the President of the EPO dated 25 November 
2022 (OJ EPO 2022, A113) as to consistency too rigorously. The reverse 
situation should never occur, i.e. all reference numbers or signs used in the 
description or claims must also appear on the drawings. 
4.9 Industrial application 
The description should indicate explicitly the way in which the invention is 
capable of exploitation in industry, if this is not obvious from the description 
or from the nature of the invention. The expression "capable of exploitation 
in industry" means the same as "susceptible of industrial application", and 
indeed identical expressions are used in the French and German texts of 
the EPC. In view of the broad meaning given to the latter expression by 
Art. 57 (see G-III, 1), it is to be expected that, in most cases, the way in 
which the invention can be exploited in industry will be self-evident, so that 
no more explicit description on this point will be required; but there may be 
a few instances, e.g. in relation to methods of testing, where the manner of 
industrial exploitation is not apparent and must therefore be explicitly 
indicated. 
Also, in relation to certain biotechnological inventions, i.e. sequences and 
partial sequences of genes, the industrial application is not self-evident. 
The industrial application of such sequences must be disclosed in the 
patent application (see G-III, 4). 
4.10 Manner and order of presentation 
The manner and order of presentation of the description should be that 
specified in Rule 42(1), i.e. as set out above, unless, because of the nature 
of the invention, a different manner or a different order would afford a better 
understanding. Since the responsibility for clearly and completely 
describing the invention lies with the applicant, the examining division does 
not object to the presentation unless satisfied that such an objection would 
be a proper exercise of its discretion. 
Some departure from the requirements of Rule 42(1) is acceptable, 
provided the description is clear and orderly and all the requisite 
information is present. For example, the requirements of Rule 42(1)(c) may 
be waived where the invention is based on a fortuitous discovery, the 
practical application of which is recognised as being useful, or where the 
invention breaks entirely new ground. Also, certain technically simple 
OJ EPO 2022, A113 
Rule 42(1)(f) 
Art. 52(1) 
Art. 57 
Rule 29(3) 
Rule 42(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter II-9 
 
inventions may be fully comprehensible with the minimum of description 
and only slight reference to prior art. 
4.11 Terminology 
Although the description needs to be clear and straightforward with 
avoidance of unnecessary technical jargon, the use of recognised terms of 
art is acceptable, and will often be desirable. Little-known or 
specially-formulated technical terms may be allowed provided that they are 
adequately defined and that there is no generally recognised equivalent. 
This discretion may be extended to foreign terms when there is no 
equivalent in the language of the proceedings. Terms already having an 
established meaning are not allowed to be used to mean something 
different if this is likely to cause confusion. There may, however, be 
circumstances where a term may legitimately be borrowed from an 
analogous art. Terminology and signs must be consistent throughout the 
application. 
4.12 Computer programs 
In the particular case of inventions in the computer field, program listings in 
programming languages cannot be relied on as the sole disclosure of the 
invention. The description, as in other technical fields, should be written 
substantially in normal language, possibly accompanied by flow diagrams 
or other aids to understanding, so that the invention may be understood by 
a person skilled in the art who is deemed not to be a specialist in any 
specific programming language, but does have general programming skills. 
Short excerpts from programs written in commonly used programming 
languages can be accepted if they serve to illustrate an embodiment of the 
invention. 
4.13 Physical values, units 
When the properties of a material are referred to, the relevant units need to 
be specified if quantitative considerations are involved. If this is done by 
reference to a published standard (e.g. a standard of sieve sizes) and such 
standard is referred to by a set of initials or similar abbreviation, it needs to 
be adequately identified in the description. 
Physical values must be expressed in the units recognised in international 
practice, which is generally in the metric system, using SI units and the 
other units referred to in Chapter I of the Annex to EEC Directive 
80/181/EEC of 20 December 1979, as amended by EEC Directives 
85/1/EEC of 18 December 1984, 89/617/EEC of 27 November 1989, 
1999/103/EC of 24 January 2000, 2009/3/EC of 11 March 2009 and 
Commission Directive (EU) 2019/1258 of 23 July 2019 (see F-II, Annex 2). 
Any values not meeting this requirement must also be expressed in the 
units recognised in international practice. Values expressed in the system 
of imperial units (e.g. inches/pounds) or in units having local character 
(e.g. pint), in general, do not meet the criterion "recognised in international 
practice". 
As determined by the President under Rule 49(2), for mathematical 
formulae the symbols in general use must be employed. For chemical 
Part F – Chapter II-10 

 
 
formulae, the symbols, atomic weights and molecular formulae in general 
use must be employed. 
In general, use should be made of the technical terms, signs and symbols 
generally accepted in the field in question. 
4.14 Registered trade marks 
It is the applicant's responsibility to ensure that registered trade marks are 
acknowledged as such in the description. For the assessment of the clarity 
of claims referring to a trade mark (Art. 84), see F-IV, 4.8. With regard to 
the effect of references to trade marks on sufficiency of disclosure (Art. 83), 
see F-III, 7. 
5. Drawings 
5.1 Form and content 
Most of the requirements relating to the form and content of drawings are 
formal (see A-IX), but the examining division may sometimes need to 
consider the requirements as determined by the President under 
Rule 49(2). Of these, the only question likely to cause difficulty is whether 
the textual matter included on the drawings is absolutely indispensable. In 
the case of circuit diagrams, block schematics and flow sheets, identifying 
catchwords for functional integers of complex systems (e.g. "magnetic core 
store", "speed integrator") may be regarded as indispensable from a 
practical point of view if they are necessary to enable a diagram to be 
interpreted rapidly and clearly. 
5.2 Printing quality 
The examining division has also to check whether the drawings in the 
printing copy ("Druckexemplar") are suitable for printing. If necessary, a 
copy of the original drawings must be prepared as the printing copy. If, 
however, the quality of the original drawings is also insufficient, then the 
examining division must request the applicant to present drawings of 
sufficient quality for printing. It needs to, however, beware of any extension 
of subject-matter (Art. 123(2)). 
5.3 Photographs 
For the presentation of photographs, see A-IX, 1.2. In the case of 
photographs of insufficient original quality for printing, the examining 
division does not request filing of better photographs, as the risk of 
infringing Art. 123(2) is obvious. In that case, the insufficient quality is 
accepted for reproduction. 
6. Sequence listings 
For the presentation of sequence listings in general, see A-IV, 5. 
6.1 Reference to sequences disclosed in a database 
The application may refer to a biological sequence belonging to the state of 
the art by merely providing the sequence's accession number and its 
version or release number in a publicly available database, without 
presenting the sequence itself either in a sequence listing complying with 
the applicable WIPO standard or in any other format. 
 

Part F – Chapter II-11 
 
Since in this case the sequence is already publicly available, the applicant 
does not need to supply a sequence listing. This applies even if reference 
is made to these sequences in one or more claims or if the sequences are 
essential features of the invention or necessary for the prior-art search 
(see J 8/11). If the European patent application discloses nucleotide or 
amino acid sequences that are fragments or variants of a prior-art 
sequence, a sequence listing complying with the applicable WIPO standard 
has to be filed for these sequence fragments or variants (see the notice 
from the EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A97, p. 7). If the 
database and/or the sequences in question is/are not completely and 
unambiguously identified, the sequences are not sufficiently disclosed 
according to Art. 83 and cannot be added to the application to complete the 
disclosure without contravening Art. 123(2) (see F-III, 2). 
If such insufficiently disclosed sequences are not essential features of the 
claimed invention, normally no objection is raised. On the other hand, 
where these sequences are essential features of at least a part of the 
claimed subject-matter, this results in problems relating to the sufficiency of 
the original disclosure according to Art. 83, because the nature of the 
sequences cannot be unambiguously derived from the incomplete or 
ambiguous reference to the database. 
Examples where a biological sequence is considered an essential feature 
of the invention would be a diagnostic method using a particular nucleic 
acid sequence or a product made by a biochemical process using an 
enzyme with a particular amino acid sequence. An example of ambiguous 
identification would be the citation of an accession number of a certain 
protein in the database of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
EMBL with no indication of which version number or database release 
number is meant when there are several such numbers referring to different 
sequences of the protein. 
6.2 Sequences that need to be itemised in the sequence listing 
6.2.1 Requirements relating to sequence length and enumeration of 
residues 
As defined in paragraph 7 of the WIPO Standard ST.26, a sequence must 
be included in the sequence listing if: 
1. 
it is disclosed anywhere in the application by enumeration of its 
residues, i.e. by listing, in order, each residue of the sequence as 
defined 
in 
paragraph 3(c) 
of 
WIPO 
Standard 
ST.26 
(e.g. 
aagtgttcctagtg), and  
2. 
it contains 10 or more specifically defined nucleotides or four or more 
specifically defined amino acids. 
According to ST.26, "specifically defined" residues are any nucleotide other 
than those represented by the symbol "n" and any amino acid other than 
those represented by the symbol "X", listed in Annex I (see paragraph 3(k) 
of WIPO Standard ST.26).  
Part F – Chapter II-12 

 
 
Degenerate symbols representing a subgroup of residues are considered 
as specifically defined. For example, the degenerate nucleotide symbol "s" 
(used to represent "c" or "g" as defined in Annex I, Table 1 of ST.26) is 
specifically defined.  
Sequences containing fewer than ten specifically defined nucleotides, or 
fewer than four specifically defined amino acids must not be included in the 
sequence listing (WIPO Standard ST.26, paragraph 8). 
If a sequence is only disclosed in prose, i.e. a text describing the sequence, 
but the sequence is not enumerated, then the sequence does not have to 
be included, but may be included if the applicant wishes so. 
For instance, if the application refers to a partial sequence as follows: 
"nucleotides 90-179 of SEQ ID NO. 1", the partial sequence is described in 
prose only and, therefore, does not have to be entered as a separate 
SEQ ID in the sequence listing. 
However, if the partial sequence was described by enumerating only the 
residues between positions 90 and 179, then paragraph 7 of WIPO 
Standard ST.26 would apply and the partial sequence would have to be 
included in the sequence listing. 
6.2.2 Sequences comprising residues that are not specifically 
defined (n or X) 
If an enumerated sequence comprises regions of specifically defined 
residues separated by one or more gaps of n or X, i.e. residues that are not 
specifically defined, the representation of this sequence in the sequence 
listing depends on whether the exact number of n or X residues is known 
(see WIPO Standard ST.26, paragraph 36) or unknown (see WIPO 
Standard ST.26, paragraph 37). 
For example, considering that the following sequence is enumerated in the 
application: 
a10nxt12 
if the number of "n" residues is known, e.g. x=2, the sequence should be 
represented as a single SEQ ID (if it also meets the minimal length 
requirement as defined in paragraph 7 or ST.26 and in F-II, 6.2.1) as 
follows:  
aaaaaaaaaanntttttttttttt 
If the number of "n" residues is unknown, each region of specifically defined 
residues that meets the minimal length requirement in paragraph 7 of 
WIPO Standard ST.26 must be included in the sequence listing as a 
separate SEQ ID. 
For example, for the sequence: a10nxt12 
the sequence listing must have two entries 
 

Part F – Chapter II-13 
 
SEQ ID No. 1: aaaaaaaaaa 
SEQ ID No. 2: tttttttttttt 
The sequences should be annotated to indicate that they are part of the 
same molecule and separated by an undefined number of "n" residues (see 
example 37-2 of Annex VI of WIPO Standard ST.26).  
If a range is disclosed, e.g. x= 5-10 nucleotides, the sequence should be 
represented as a single SEQ ID comprising 5 n or 10 n (see example 36-3 
of Annex VI of WIPO Standard ST.26).  
In the above example, the sequence must either comprise 5 n or 10 n. In 
both cases, the SEQ ID must be annotated with a "note" qualifier. In cases 
where the sequence comprises 5 n, the note should indicate that up to 5 n 
can be added. In cases where the sequence comprises 10 n, the note 
should indicate that up to 5 n can be deleted. The appropriate feature key 
must be associated with the "note" qualifier describing the variant. See 
paragraph 96 of WIPO Standard ST.26 and F-II, 6.2.3 for information on 
selecting the correct feature key.  
Alternatively, if a range is disclosed, e.g. x= 5-10 nucleotides, all possible 
variants may be represented independently, i.e. as separate SEQ IDs.  
6.2.3 Variants 
If the application describes variants of a sequence, e.g. "nucleotides 90-179 
of SEQ ID No. 1 are deleted or substituted by another sequence", then 
paragraph 95 of WIPO Standard ST.26 applies. This paragraph defines that 
these variants should be described by annotation of the primary sequence. 
It is a recommendation but it is not compulsory as long as the specific 
variant sequence is not enumerated as such in the application. 
If the applicant chooses to enter this information in the sequence listing, the 
following rules as defined in paragraph 95 of ST.26 should be followed:  
(a) 
the variant may be represented by annotation of the primary 
sequence, where it contains variation(s) at a single location or 
multiple distinct locations and the occurrences of those variations are 
independent, 
(b) 
the variant should be represented as a separate sequence and 
assigned its own sequence identification number, where it contains 
variations at multiple distinct locations and the occurrences of those 
variations are interdependent, and 
(c) 
must be represented as a separate sequence and assigned its own 
sequence identification number, where it contains an inserted or 
substituted sequence that contains in excess of 1 000 residues.  
The following table indicates which feature key and qualifier should be used 
to annotate the variants according to the type of sequence and the type of 
variation (see paragraph 96 of WIPO Standard ST.26).  
Part F – Chapter II-14 

 
 
Type of 
sequence 
Feature key 
Qualifier 
Use 
Nucleic acid 
Variation 
replace or 
note 
Naturally occurring 
mutations and 
polymorphisms, e.g. 
alleles, RFLPs. 
Nucleic acid 
misc_difference 
replace or 
note 
Variability introduced 
artificially, e.g. by 
genetic manipulation or 
by chemical synthesis. 
Amino acid 
VAR_SEQ 
note 
Variant produced by 
alternative splicing, 
alternative promoter 
usage, alternative 
initiation and ribosomal 
frameshifting. 
Amino acid 
VARIANT 
note 
Any type of variant for 
which VAR_SEQ is not 
applicable. 
6.2.4 The qualifier "mol_type" 
The feature key "source" is mandatory for every sequence, in addition to 
the qualifiers "organism" and "mol_type" (paragraph 75 of WIPO Standard 
ST.26).  
The value of the "mol_type" qualifier has to be selected from a list of 
predetermined terms as defined in Annex I of WIPO Standard ST.26 
(section 6, qualifier mol_type 6.39; section 8, qualifier mol_type 8.1) and 
shown in the following table:  
DNA 
RNA 
AA 
genomic DNA 
other DNA 
unassigned DNA 
genomic RNA 
mRNA 
tRNA 
rRNA 
transcribed RNA 
viral cRNA 
other RNA 
unassigned RNA 
protein 
The value "genomic DNA" does not imply that the molecule is nuclear (e.g. 
organelle and plasmid DNA must be described using "genomic DNA").  
Ribosomal RNA genes must be described using "genomic DNA".  
The value "rRNA" must only be used if the ribosomal RNA molecule itself 
has been sequenced. 
The values "other RNA" and "other DNA" must be applied to synthetic 
molecules, i.e. molecules that have been artificially created.  
The values "unassigned DNA" and "unassigned RNA", on the other hand, 
must be used for molecules that have been isolated from an organism but 
 

Part F – Chapter II-15 
 
their nature is not known or not disclosed and they cannot be assigned to 
any more precise qualifier value (e.g. it is not known whether the sequence 
is a tRNA or an mRNA or another type of natural RNA).  
7. Prohibited matter 
7.1 Categories 
There are three categories of specifically prohibited matter, these being 
defined in sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) of Rule 48(1) (see also G-II, 4). 
7.2 Matter contrary to "ordre public" or morality 
The omission, from the publication of the application, is mandatory for the 
first category (Rule 48(1)(a)). Examples of the kind of matter coming within 
this category are: incitement to riot or to acts of disorder; incitement to 
criminal acts; racial, religious or similar discriminatory propaganda; and 
grossly obscene matter. 
With regard to patentability issues with such matter, see G-II, 4.1 and 
subsections. 
7.3 Disparaging statements 
It is necessary to discriminate in the second category between libellous or 
similarly disparaging statements, which are not allowed, and fair comment, 
e.g. in relation to obvious or generally recognised disadvantages, or 
disadvantages stated to have been found and substantiated by the 
applicant, which, if relevant, is permitted. 
7.4 Irrelevant or unnecessary matter 
The third category is irrelevant or unnecessary matter: such matter is 
specifically prohibited under Rule 48(1)(c) only if it is "obviously irrelevant or 
unnecessary", for instance, if it has no bearing on the subject-matter of the 
invention or its background of relevant prior art (see also F-II, 4.4). The 
matter to be removed may already be obviously irrelevant or unnecessary 
in the original description. It may, however, be matter which has become 
obviously irrelevant or unnecessary only in the course of the examination 
proceedings, e.g. owing to a limitation of the claims of the patent to one of 
originally several alternatives. When matter is removed from the 
description, it must not be incorporated into the patent specification by 
reference to the corresponding matter in the published application or in any 
other document (see also F-III, 8). 
7.5 Omission of matter from publication 
Generally, the Receiving Section will deal with matter falling under 
category 1(a) and may have dealt with matter obviously falling within 
category 1(b), but if any such matter has not been so recognised and has 
therefore not been omitted from the publication of the application, it is 
required to be removed during examination of the application together with 
any other prohibited matter. The applicant is informed of the category under 
which matter is required to be removed. 
Rule 48 
Rule 48(1)(a) 
Rule 48(1)(b) 
Rule 48(1)(c) 
Rule 48(2) and 
(3) 
Part F – Chapter II-16 

 
 
Annex 1 
Checklist for considering the abstract (see F-II, 2.5) 
In the following checklist, the abstractor should, after having studied the 
disclosure to be abstracted, place a check in the second column after the 
applicable terms listed in the first column. The requirements listed in the 
third column corresponding to the checked items of the first column should 
be borne in mind by the abstractor when preparing the abstract. Finally, the 
abstractor may compare the finished abstract with the checked 
requirements and place a corresponding checkmark in the fourth column if 
satisfied that the requirements have been met. 
If the 
invention is 
a(n) 
Check 
here 
The abstract should deal with: 
If so, 
check 
here 
Article 
 
its identity, use; 
construction, organisation, method of 
manufacture 
 
Chemical 
compound 
 
its identity (structure if appropriate); 
method of preparation, properties, uses 
 
Mixture 
 
its nature, properties, use; 
essential ingredients (identity, function); 
proportion of ingredients, if significant; 
preparation 
 
Machine, 
apparatus, 
system 
 
its nature, use; construction, 
organisation;  
operation 
 
Process or 
operation 
 
its nature and characterising features; 
material and conditions employed; 
product, if significant; 
nature of and relationship between the 
steps, if more than one 
 
If the 
disclosure 
involves 
alternatives 
 
the abstract should deal with the 
preferred alternative and identify the 
others if this can be done succinctly; 
if this cannot be done, it should mention 
that they exist and whether they differ 
substantially from the preferred 
alternative 
 
Total number of words less than 250: …....... 
in range 50-150: …….... 
Ref: Standards – ST.12/A, April 1994 
Original: Handbook on Industrial Property Information and Documentation, Publication N° 208(E), 1998, 
WIPO, Geneva (CH). 
 

Part F – Chapter II-17 
 
Annex 2 
Units recognised in international practice as determined by the 
President under Rule 49(2) (see F-II, 4.13)* 
1. SI units and their decimal multiples and submultiples 
1.1 SI base units 
Quantity 
Unit 
 
Name 
Symbol 
Length 
metre 
m 
Mass 
kilogram 
kg 
Time 
second 
s 
Electric current 
ampere 
A 
Thermodynamic temperature 
kelvin 
K 
Amount of substance 
mole 
mol 
Luminous intensity 
candela 
cd 
Definitions of SI base units: 
– Unit of time 
The second, symbol s, is the SI unit of time. It is defined by taking the fixed 
numerical value of the caesium frequency ΔνCs, the unperturbed 
ground-state hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium 133 atom, to be 
9 192 631 770 when expressed in the unit Hz, which is equal to s–1. 
– Unit of length 
The metre, symbol m, is the SI unit of length. It is defined by taking the 
fixed numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum c to be 299 792 458 
when expressed in the unit m/s, where the second is defined in terms of 
ΔνCs. 
– Unit of mass 
The kilogram, symbol kg, is the SI unit of mass. It is defined by taking the 
fixed numerical value of the Planck constant h to be 6.626 070 15 × 10–34 
when expressed in the unit J s, which is equal to kg m2 s–1, where the metre 
and the second are defined in terms of c and ΔνCs.  
– Unit of electric current 
The ampere, symbol A, is the SI unit of electric current. It is defined by 
taking the fixed numerical value of the elementary charge e to be 
1.602 176 634 × 10–19 when expressed in the unit C, which is equal to A s, 
where the second is defined in terms of ΔνCs. 
– Unit of thermodynamic temperature 
The kelvin, symbol K, is the SI unit of thermodynamic temperature. It is 
defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Boltzmann constant k to 
be 1.380 649 × 10–23 when expressed in the unit J K–1, which is equal to kg 
 
* 
Mainly based on Chapter I of the Annex to EEC Directive 80/181/EEC of 20.12.1979, as amended 
by EEC Directives 85/1/EEC of 18.12.1984, 89/617/EEC of 27.11.1989, 1999/103/EC of 
24.01.2000, 2009/3/EC of 11.03.2009 and Commission Directive (EU) 2019/1258 of 23.07.2019. 
Part F – Chapter II-18 

 
 
m2 s–2 K–1, where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of h, 
c and ΔνCs. 
– Unit of amount of substance 
The mole, symbol mol, is the SI unit of amount of substance. One mole 
contains exactly 6.022 140 76 × 1023 elementary entities. This number is 
the fixed numerical value of the Avogadro constant, NA, when expressed in 
the unit mol–1 and is called the Avogadro number. 
The amount of substance, symbol n, of a system is a measure of the 
number of specified elementary entities. An elementary entity may be an 
atom, a molecule, an ion, an electron, any other particle or specified group 
of particles. 
– Unit of luminous intensity 
The candela, symbol cd, is the SI unit of luminous intensity in a given 
direction. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the luminous 
efficacy of monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 × 1012 Hz, Kcd, to be 
683 when expressed in the unit lm W–1, which is equal to cd sr W–1, or cd sr 
kg–1 m–2 s3, where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of 
h, c and ΔνCs. 
1.1.1 Special name and symbol of the SI derived unit of temperature 
for expressing Celsius temperature 
Quantity 
Unit 
 
Name 
Symbol 
Celsius temperature 
degree Celsius 
°C 
Celsius temperature t is defined as the difference t = T-T0 between the two 
thermodynamic temperatures T and T0 where T0 = 273.15 K. An interval of 
or difference in temperature may be expressed either in kelvins or in 
degrees Celsius. The unit of "degree Celsius" is equal to the unit "kelvin". 
1.2 SI derived units 
1.2.1 General rule for SI derived units 
Units derived coherently from SI base units are given as algebraic 
expressions in the form of products of powers of the SI base units with a 
numerical factor equal to 1. 
1.2.2 SI derived units with special names and symbols 
Quantity 
Unit 
Expression 
 
Name 
Symbol In other SI 
units 
In terms of SI 
base units 
Plane angle 
radian 
rad 
 
m·m-1 
Solid angle 
steradian 
sr 
 
m2·m-2 
Frequency 
hertz 
Hz 
 
s-1 
Force 
newton 
N 
 
m·kg·s-2 
Pressure, stress 
pascal 
Pa 
N·m-2 
m-1·kg·s-2 
Energy, work; quantity of 
heat 
joule 
J 
N·m 
m2·kg·s-2 
Power(1), radiant flux 
watt 
W 
J·s-1 
m2·kg·s-3 
 

Part F – Chapter II-19 
 
Quantity 
Unit 
Expression 
 
Name 
Symbol In other SI 
units 
In terms of SI 
base units 
Quantity of electricity, 
electric charge 
coulomb 
C 
 
s·A 
Electric potential, 
potential difference, 
electromotive force 
volt 
V 
W·A-1 
m2·kg·s-3·A-1 
Electric resistance 
ohm 
Ω 
V·A-1 
m2·kg·s-3·A-2 
Conductance 
siemens 
S 
A·V-1 
m-2·kg-1·s3·A2 
Capacitance 
farad 
F 
C·V-1 
m-2·kg-1·s4·A2 
Magnetic flux 
weber 
Wb 
V·s  
m2·kg·s-2·A-1 
Magnetic flux density 
tesla 
T 
Wb·m-2 
kg·s-2·A-1 
Inductance 
henry 
H 
Wb·A-1 
m2·kg·s-2·A-2 
Luminous flux 
lumen 
lm 
cd·sr  
cd 
Illuminance 
lux 
lx 
lm·m-2 
m-2·cd 
Activity (of a 
radionuclide) 
becquerel Bq 
 
s-1 
Absorbed dose, specific 
energy imparted, kerma, 
absorbed dose index 
gray 
Gy 
J·kg-1 
m2·s-2 
Dose equivalent 
sievert 
Sv 
J·kg-1 
m2·s-2 
Catalytic activity 
katal 
kat 
 
mol·s-1 
(1) 
Special names for the unit of power: the name volt-ampere (symbol "VA") is used to express the 
apparent power of alternating electric current, and var (symbol "var") is used to express reactive 
electric power. 
Units derived from SI base units may be expressed in terms of the units 
listed in this annex. 
In particular, derived SI units may be expressed by the special names and 
symbols given in the above table. For example, the SI unit of dynamic 
viscosity may be expressed as m-1.kg.s-1 or N.s.m-2 or Pa.s. 
1.3 Prefixes and their symbols used to designate certain decimal 
multiples and submultiples 
Factor 
Prefix 
Symbol 
Factor 
Prefix 
Symbol 
1024 
yotta 
Y 
10-1 
deci 
d 
1021 
zetta 
Z 
10-2 
centi 
c 
1018 
exa 
E 
10-3 
milli 
m 
1015 
peta 
P 
10-6 
micro 
µ 
1012 
tera 
T 
10-9 
nano 
n 
109 
giga 
G 
10-12 
pico 
p 
106 
mega 
M 
10-15 
femto 
f 
103 
kilo 
k 
10-18 
atto 
a 
102 
hecto 
h 
10-21 
zepto 
z 
101 
deca 
da 
10-24 
yocto 
y 
The names and symbols of the decimal multiples and submultiples of the 
unit of mass are formed by attaching prefixes to the word "gram" and their 
symbols to the symbol "g". 
Part F – Chapter II-20 

 
 
Where a derived unit is expressed as a fraction, its decimal multiples and 
submultiples may be designated by attaching a prefix to units in the 
numerator or the denominator, or in both these parts. 
Compound prefixes, that is to say prefixes formed by the juxtaposition of 
several of the above prefixes, may not be used. 
1.4 Special authorised names and symbols of decimal multiples and 
submultiples of SI units 
Quantity 
Unit 
 
 
Name 
Symbol 
Value 
Volume 
litre 
l or L(1) 
1 l = 1 dm3 = 10-3 m3 
Mass 
tonne 
t 
1 t = 1 Mg = 103 kg 
Pressure, stress 
bar 
bar 
1 bar = 105 Pa 
Length 
Ångström 
Å 
1 Å = 10-10 m 
(1) 
The two symbols "l" and "L" may be used for the litre unit. 
The prefixes and their symbols listed in F-II, Annex 2, 1.3 may be used in 
conjunction with the units and symbols contained in this table. 
2. 
Units which are defined on the basis of SI units but are not 
decimal multiples or submultiples thereof 
Quantity 
Unit 
 
 
Name 
Symbol 
Value 
Plane angle 
revolution(a) 
 
1 revolution = 2 π rad 
grade or gon  
gon 
1 gon = π / 200 rad 
degree 
° 
1° = π / 180 rad 
minute of angle 
' 
1' = π / 10 800 rad 
second of angle 
" 
1" = π / 648 000 rad 
Time 
Minute 
min 
1 min = 60 s 
Hour 
h 
1 h = 3 600 s 
Day 
d 
1 d = 86 400 s 
(a)  No international symbol exists 
The prefixes listed in F-II, Annex 2, 1.3 may only be used in conjunction 
with the names "grade" or "gon" and the symbols only with the symbol 
"gon". 
3. 
Units used with the SI, and whose values in SI are obtained 
experimentally 
The unified atomic mass unit is 1/12 of the mass of an atom of the 
nuclide 12C. 
The electronvolt is the kinetic energy acquired by an electron passing 
through a potential difference of 1 volt in a vacuum. 
Quantity 
Unit 
 
 
Name 
Symbol 
Value 
Mass 
unified atomic 
mass unit 
u 
1 u ≈ 1,6605655 x 10-27 kg 
Energy 
Electronvolt 
eV 
1eV ≈ 1,6021892 x 10-19 J 
 

Part F – Chapter II-21 
 
The value of these units, expressed in SI units, is not known exactly. 
The prefixes and their symbols listed in F-II, Annex 2, 1.3 may be used in 
conjunction with these two units and with their symbols. 
4. Units and names of units permitted in specialised fields only 
Quantity 
Unit 
 
 
Name 
Symbol 
Value 
Vergency of 
optical systems 
dioptre 
 
1 dioptre = 1 m-1 
Mass of precious 
stones 
metric 
carat 
 
1 metric carat = 2 x 10-4 kg 
Area of farmland 
and building land 
are 
a 
1 a = 102 m2 
Mass per unit 
length of textile 
yarns and threads 
tex 
tex 
1 tex = 10-6 kg.m-1 
Blood pressure 
and pressure of 
other body fluids 
millimetre 
of mercury 
mm Hg  
1 mm Hg = 133.322 Pa 
Pressure in the 
fields of plasma 
physics and 
semiconductors 
millimetre 
of mercury 
mm Hg 
1 mm Hg = 133.322387 Pa 
Torr 
Torr 
1 Torr = 133.322368 Pa 
Effective cross-
sectional area 
Barn 
b 
1b = 10-28 m2 
The prefixes and their symbols listed in F-II, Annex 2, 1.3 may be used in 
conjunction with the above units and symbols, with the exception of the 
millimetre of mercury and its symbol. The multiple of 102 a is, however, 
called a "hectare". 
5. Compound units 
Combinations of the units listed in this annex form compound units. 
 

Part F – Chapter III-1 
 
Chapter III – Sufficiency of disclosure 
1. Sufficiency of disclosure 
A detailed description of at least one way of carrying out the invention must 
be given. Since the application is addressed to the person skilled in the art, 
it is neither necessary nor desirable that details of well-known ancillary 
features are given, but the description must disclose any feature essential 
for carrying out the invention in sufficient detail to render it apparent to the 
skilled person how to put the invention into practice. A single example may 
suffice, but where the claims cover a broad field, the application is not 
usually regarded as satisfying the requirements of Art. 83 unless the 
description gives a number of examples or describes alternative 
embodiments or variations extending over the area protected by the claims. 
However, regard must be had to the facts and evidence of the particular 
case. There are some instances where even a very broad field is 
sufficiently exemplified by a limited number of examples or even one 
example (see also F-IV, 6.3). In these latter cases the application must 
contain, in addition to the examples, sufficient information to allow the 
person skilled in the art, using common general knowledge, to perform the 
invention over the whole area claimed without undue burden and without 
needing inventive skill (see T 727/95). In this context, the "whole area 
claimed" is to be understood as substantially any embodiment falling within 
the ambit of a claim, even though a limited amount of trial and error may be 
permissible, e.g. in an unexplored field or when there are many technical 
difficulties (see T 226/85 and T 409/91). 
However when assessing sufficiency of disclosure, the intrinsic limitations 
that a sensible reading imposes on the subject-matter of the independent 
claims must be taken into consideration; in other words the person skilled in 
the art wishing to implement the claimed invention will exclude any 
embodiment that is meaningless and not consistent with the teaching of the 
application (see T 521/12). 
With regard to Art. 83, an objection of lack of sufficient disclosure 
presupposes that there are serious doubts, substantiated by verifiable facts 
(see T 409/91 and T 694/92). If the examining division is able, under the 
particular circumstances, to make out a reasoned case that the application 
lacks sufficient disclosure, the onus of establishing that the invention may 
be performed and repeated over substantially the whole of the claimed 
range lies with the applicant (see F-III, 4). 
For the requirements of Art. 83 and of Rule 42(1)(c) and Rule 42(1)(e) to be 
fully satisfied, it is necessary that the invention is described not only in 
terms of its structure but also in terms of its function, unless the functions of 
the various parts are immediately apparent. Indeed, in some technical fields 
(e.g. computers), a clear description of function may be much more 
appropriate than an over-detailed description of structure. 
In cases where it is found that an application is sufficiently disclosed 
according to Art. 83 only in respect of a part of the claimed subject-matter, 
this may have led to the issuing of a partial European or supplementary 
European search report according to Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 and 
Rule 42(1)(e) 
Art. 83 
Art. 83 
Rule 42(1)(c) and 
(e) 
Rule 63 
Part F – Chapter III-2 

 
 
B-VIII, 3.2). In such cases, in the absence of appropriate amendment, an 
objection under Rule 63(3) will also arise (see H-II, 5 and H-IV, 4.1.1). 
2. 
Art. 83 vs. Art. 123(2) 
It is the responsibility of the applicants to ensure that they supply on filing 
their application, a sufficient disclosure, i.e. one that meets the 
requirements of Art. 83 in respect of the invention as claimed in all of the 
claims. If the claims define the invention, or a feature thereof, in terms of 
parameters, the application as filed must include a clear description of the 
methods used to determine the parameter values, unless a person skilled 
in the art would know what method to use or unless all methods would yield 
the same result (see F-IV, 4.11). If the disclosure is seriously insufficient, 
such a deficiency cannot be cured subsequently by adding further 
examples or features without offending against Art. 123(2), which requires 
that amendments may not result in the introduction of subject-matter which 
extends beyond the content of the application as filed (see H-IV, 2.1; see 
also H-V, 2.2). Therefore, in such circumstances, the application must 
normally be refused. If, however, the deficiency arises only in respect of 
some embodiments of the invention and not others, it could be remedied by 
restricting the claims to correspond to the sufficiently described 
embodiments only, the description of the remaining embodiments being 
deleted. 
3. 
Insufficient disclosure 
Occasionally applications are filed in which there is a fundamental 
insufficiency in the invention in the sense that it cannot be carried out by a 
person skilled in the art; there is then a failure to satisfy the requirements of 
Art. 83 which is essentially irreparable.  
Two instances deserve special mention. The first is where the successful 
performance of the invention is dependent on chance. That is to say, the 
skilled person, in following the instructions for carrying out the invention, 
finds either that the alleged results of the invention are unrepeatable or that 
success in obtaining these results is achieved in a totally unreliable way. 
Sufficiency of disclosure cannot be acknowledged if the skilled person has 
to carry out a research programme based on trial and error to reproduce 
the 
results 
of 
the 
invention, 
with 
limited 
chances 
of 
success 
(T 38/11, Reasons 2.6). An example where this may arise is a 
microbiological process involving mutations. Such a case is to be 
distinguished from one where repeated success is assured even though 
accompanied by a proportion of failures, as can arise e.g. in the 
manufacture of small magnetic cores or electronic components. In this 
latter case, provided the satisfactory parts can be readily sorted by a 
non-destructive testing procedure, no objection arises under Art. 83. 
Another example can be found in the field of artificial intelligence if the 
mathematical methods and the training datasets are disclosed in 
insufficient detail to reproduce the technical effect over the whole range 
claimed. Such a lack of detail may result in a disclosure that is more like an 
invitation to a research programme (see also G-II, 3.3.1). 
The second instance is where successful performance of the invention is 
inherently impossible because it would be contrary to well-established 
Art. 83 
Art. 123(2) 
Art. 83 
 

Part F – Chapter III-3 
 
physical laws – this applies e.g. to a perpetual motion machine. If the 
claims for such a machine are directed to its function, and not merely to its 
structure, an objection arises not only under Art. 83 but also under 
Art. 52(1) in that the invention is not "susceptible of industrial application" 
(see G-III, 1). 
4. Burden of proof as regards the possibility of performing and 
repeating the invention 
Although the burden of proof in the framework of sufficiency of disclosure 
as a rule lies with the party raising the objection, this principle does not 
apply to cases where the application as filed does not provide a single 
example or other technical information from which it is plausible that the 
claimed invention can be carried out (see e.g. T 1329/11). 
Furthermore, if there are serious doubts as regards the possibility of 
performing the invention and repeating it as described, the burden of proof 
as regards this possibility, or at least a demonstration that success is 
credible, rests with the applicant or the proprietor of the patent. In 
opposition, this may be the case where, for example, experiments carried 
out by the opponent suggest that the subject-matter of the patent does not 
achieve the desired technical result. As regards the possibility of performing 
and repeating the invention, see also F-III, 3. 
5. Cases of partially insufficient disclosure 
5.1 Only variants of the invention are incapable of being performed 
The fact that only variants of the invention, e.g. one of a number of 
embodiments of it, are not capable of being performed does not 
immediately give rise to the conclusion that the subject-matter of the 
invention as a whole is incapable of being performed, i.e. is incapable of 
resolving the problem involved and therefore of achieving the desired 
technical result. 
Those parts of the description relating to the variants of the invention which 
are incapable of being performed and the relevant claims must, however, 
then be deleted or marked background information that is not part of the 
invention (see F-IV, 4.3(iii)) at the request of the division if the deficiency is 
not remedied. The specification must then be so worded that the remaining 
claims are supported by the description and do not relate to embodiments 
which have proved to be incapable of being performed. 
In some particular cases (for example claims relating to a combination of 
ranges or Markush claims), the scope of the claim might encompass a 
large number of alternatives, some of which correspond to non-working 
embodiments. In such cases, the presence of non-working embodiments in 
the claim is of no harm, provided that the specification contains sufficient 
information on the relevant criteria to identify the working embodiments 
within the claimed alternatives (G 1/03). See also G-VII, 5.2. 
5.2 Absence of well-known details 
For the purposes of sufficient disclosure the specification does not need to 
describe all the details of the operations to be carried out by the person 
Part F – Chapter III-4 

 
 
skilled in the art on the basis of the instructions given, if these details are 
well-known and clear from the definition of the class of the claims or on the 
basis of common general knowledge (see also F-III, 1 and F-IV, 4.5). 
5.3 Difficulties in performing the invention 
An invention is not immediately regarded as incapable of being performed 
on account of a reasonable degree of difficulty experienced in its 
performance ("teething troubles", for example). 
1st example: The difficulties which could, for example, arise from the fact 
that an artificial hip joint could be fitted to the human body only by a 
surgeon of great experience and above-average ability would not prevent 
manufacturers of orthopaedic devices from deriving complete information 
from the description with the result that they could reproduce the invention 
with a view to making an artificial hip joint. 
2nd example: A switchable semiconductor which, according to the 
invention, is used for switching electrical circuits on and off without using 
contacts, thereby making for smoother operation, suffers from teething 
troubles in that a residual current continues to flow in the circuit when 
switched off. However, this residual current adversely affects the use of the 
electrical switch in certain fields only, and can otherwise be reduced to 
negligible proportions by routine further development of the semiconductor. 
6. 
Inventions relating to biological material 
6.1 Biological material 
Applications relating to biological material are subject to the special 
provisions set out in Rule 31. In accordance with Rule 26(3), the term 
"biological material" means any material containing genetic information and 
capable of reproducing itself or being reproduced in a biological system. If 
an invention involves the use of or concerns biological material which is not 
available to the public and which cannot be described in the European 
patent application in such a manner as to enable the invention to be carried 
out by a person skilled in the art, the disclosure is not considered to have 
satisfied the requirements of Art. 83 unless the requirements of 
Rule 31(1), (2), first and second sentences, and 33(1), first sentence, have 
been met. 
For inventions based on biological material of plant or animal origin or using 
such material, it is recommended that the application, where appropriate, 
includes information on the geographical origin of such material, if known. 
However, this is without prejudice to the examination of European patent 
applications and European patents (EU Dir 98/44/EC, rec. 27). 
6.2 Public availability of biological material 
The division must form an opinion as to whether or not the biological 
material is available to the public. There are several possibilities. The 
biological material may be known to be readily available to those skilled in 
the art, e.g. baker's yeast or Bacillus natto, which is commercially available, 
it may be a standard preserved strain, or other biological material which the 
division knows to have been preserved in a recognised depositary 
Rule 26(3) 
Rule 31(1) 
Rule 26(1) 
 

Part F – Chapter III-5 
 
institution and to be available to the public without restriction (see notice 
from the European Patent Office dated 7 July 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 498). 
Alternatively, the applicant may have given in the description sufficient 
information as to the identifying characteristics of the biological material 
and as to the prior availability to the public without restriction in a depositary 
institution recognised for the purposes of Rule 33(6) to satisfy the division 
(see the notice from the European Patent Office dated 7 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 498). In any of these cases no further action is called for. If, 
however, the applicant has given no or insufficient information on public 
availability and the biological material is a particular strain not falling within 
the known categories such as those already mentioned, then the division 
must assume that the biological material is not available to the public. It 
must also examine whether the biological material could be described in 
the European patent application in such a manner as to enable the 
invention to be carried out by a person skilled in the art (see, in particular, 
F-III, 3 and G-II, 5.5). 
6.3 Deposit of biological material 
If the biological material is not available to the public and if it cannot be 
described in the application in such a manner as to enable the invention to 
be carried out by a person skilled in the art, the division must check: 
(i) 
whether the application as filed gives such relevant information as is 
available to the applicant on the characteristics of the biological 
material. The relevant information under this provision concerns the 
classification of the biological material and significant differences 
from known biological material. For this purpose, the applicant must, 
to the extent available, indicate morphological and biochemical 
characteristics and the proposed taxonomic description. 
The information on the biological material in question which is 
generally known to the skilled person on the date of filing is as a rule 
presumed to be available to the applicant, who must therefore 
provide it. If necessary, it has to be provided through experiments in 
accordance with the relevant standard literature. 
For characterising bacteria, for example, the relevant standard work 
would be R.E. Buchanan, N.E. Gibbons: Bergey's Manual of 
Determinative Bacteriology. 
Against this background, information needs to then be given on every 
further specific morphological or physiological characteristic relevant 
for recognition and propagation of the biological material, 
e.g. suitable media (composition of ingredients), in particular where 
the latter are modified. 
Abbreviations for biological material or media are often less well 
known than the applicant assumes and are therefore to be avoided 
or written in full at least once. 
If biological material is deposited that cannot replicate itself but must 
be replicated in a biological system (e.g. viruses, bacteriophages, 
Rule 31(1) and 
(2) 
Part F – Chapter III-6 

 
 
plasmids, vectors or free DNA or RNA), the above-mentioned 
information is also required for such biological system. If, for 
example, other biological material is required, such as host cells or 
helper viruses, that cannot be sufficiently described or is not 
available to the public, this material must also be deposited and 
characterised accordingly. In addition, the process for producing the 
biological material within this biological system must be indicated. 
In many cases the above required information will already have been 
given to the depositary institution (see Rule 6.1(a)(iii) and 6.1(b) of 
the Regulation under the Budapest Treaty) and need only be 
incorporated into the application; 
(ii) 
whether the name of the depositary institution and the accession 
number of the deposit were supplied at the date of filing. If the name 
of the depositary institution and the accession number of the deposit 
were submitted later, it is checked whether they were filed within the 
relevant period under Rule 31(2). If that is the case, it is then further 
checked whether on the filing date any reference was supplied which 
enables the deposit to be related to the later filed accession number. 
Normally the identification reference which the depositor gave to the 
deposit is used in the application documents. The relevant document 
for later filing the data pursuant to Rule 31(1)(c) could be a letter 
containing the name of the depositary institution, the accession 
number and the above-mentioned identification reference or, 
alternatively, the deposit receipt, which contains all these data (see 
also G 2/93 and A-IV, 4.2); and 
(iii) 
whether the deposit was made by a person other than the applicant 
and, if so, whether the name and the address of the depositor are 
stated in the application or were supplied within the relevant period 
under Rule 31(2). In such a case, the division must also check 
whether the document fulfilling the requirements mentioned in 
Rule 31(1)(d) was submitted to the EPO within the same time limit 
(see A-IV, 4.1 for details of when this document referred to in 
Rule 31(1)(d) is required). 
The division, in addition to the checks referred to under (i) to (iii) above, 
asks for the deposit receipt issued by the depositary institution 
(see Rule 7.1 of the Regulation under the Budapest Treaty) or for 
equivalent proof of the deposit of a biological material if such proof has not 
been filed before (see (ii) above and A-IV, 4.2). This is to provide evidence 
for the indications made by the applicant pursuant to Rule 31(1)(c). 
If this deposit receipt has already been filed within the relevant time period 
according to Rule 31(2), this document on its own is regarded as 
submission of the information according to Rule 31(1)(c). 
In addition, the depositary institution named must be one of the recognised 
institutions listed in the Official Journal of the EPO. An up-to-date list is 
regularly published in the Official Journal. 
Rule 33(6) 
 

Part F – Chapter III-7 
 
Where a deposit was originally not made under the Budapest Treaty, it 
must be converted to a deposit made within the purview of the Budapest 
Treaty no later than the date of filing of the European patent application in 
order to fulfil the requirement of Rule 31(1)(a). 
If any of these requirements is not satisfied, the biological material in 
question cannot be considered as having been disclosed pursuant to 
Art. 83 by way of reference to the deposit. 
Moreover, there are two situations in which the applicant can file 
information concerning the deposit which is required under Rule 31(1)(c), 
and where applicable also under Rule 31(1)(d), in a document filed after the 
accorded filing date and within the relevant time limit for filing that 
document, but after the expiry of one of the time limits under 
Rule 31(2)(a) to Rule 31(2)(c). As in the preceding paragraph, the 
consequence of the information being filed after the relevant time limit 
under Rule 31(2) is that the biological material is deemed not to have been 
disclosed pursuant to Art. 83 by way of reference to the deposit. These 
situations are those in which the information concerning the deposit is 
contained in either: 
(a) 
a previously filed application to which reference is made under 
Rule 40(1)(c), the copy of that application being filed within either the 
two-month period under Rule 40(3) or that under Rule 55; or 
(b) 
missing parts of the description filed later, within the two-month 
period under Rule 56(2), when the requirements of Rule 56(3) are 
satisfied, or correct application documents or parts filed later, within 
the two-month period under Rule 56a(3), when the requirements of 
Rule 56a(4) are satisfied, so that the application is not redated. 
6.4 Priority claim 
An application may claim the priority of a previous application with regard to 
unavailable biological material mentioned in F-III, 6.1. In this case, the 
invention is considered disclosed in the previous application for the purpose 
of the priority claim under Art. 87(1) only if the deposit of the biological 
material was made no later than the date of filing of the previous application 
and in accordance with the requirements of the country in which it was filed. 
Also, the reference to the deposit in the previous application must be made 
in a manner enabling it to be identified. Where the deposit of the biological 
material referred to in the European patent application is not the same as 
the deposit referred to in the priority, it is up to the applicant, if the EPO 
considers it necessary, to provide evidence that the biological material is 
identical (see also the notice from the EPO dated 7 July 2010, 
OJ EPO 2010, 498). 
6.5 Euro-PCT cases 
International applications relating to the aforementioned unavailable 
biological material and designating or electing the EPO must comply with 
Rule 13bis PCT in conjunction with Rule 31. That means that for sufficient 
disclosure of the material the deposit with a recognised depositary 
institution must be made not later than the international filing date, relevant 
Rule 31 
Rule 40(1)(c) 
Rule 56(2) and 
(3) 
Rule 56a(3) and 
Rule 56a(4) 
Part F – Chapter III-8 

 
 
information must be given in the application and the necessary indications 
must be furnished as required during the international phase (see also the 
notice from the EPO dated 7 July 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 498). 
7. 
Proper names, trade marks and trade names 
The use of proper names, trade marks or trade names or similar words to 
refer to materials or articles is undesirable in so far as such words merely 
denote origin or where they may relate to a range of different products. If 
such a word is used, then, where it is necessary in order to satisfy the 
requirements of Art. 83, the product must be sufficiently identified, without 
reliance upon the word, to enable the invention to be carried out by the 
skilled person at the date of filing. However, where such words have 
become internationally accepted as standard descriptive terms and have 
acquired a precise meaning (e.g. "Bowden" cable, "Belleville" washer, 
"Panhard" rod, "caterpillar" belt) they may be allowed without further 
identification of the product to which they relate. For the assessment of the 
clarity of claims referring to a trade mark (Art. 84), see F-IV, 4.8. 
8. 
Reference documents 
References in European patent applications to other documents may relate 
either to the background art or to part of the disclosure of the invention. 
Where the reference document relates to the background art, it may be in 
the application as originally filed or introduced at a later date 
(see F-II, 4.3 and 4.4 and H-IV, 2.2.7). 
Where the reference document relates directly to the disclosure of the 
invention (e.g. details of one of the components of a claimed apparatus), 
then the examining division first considers whether knowing what is in the 
reference document is in fact essential for carrying out the invention as 
meant by Art. 83. 
If not essential, the usual expression "which is hereby incorporated by 
reference", or any expression of the same kind, needs to be deleted from 
the description. 
If matter in the document referred to is essential to satisfy the requirements 
of Art. 83, the examining division requires the deletion of the 
above-mentioned expression and that, instead, the matter is expressly 
incorporated into the description, because the patent specification must, 
regarding the essential features of the invention, be self-contained, 
i.e. capable of being understood without reference to any other document. 
Furthermore, documents are not part of the text to be translated pursuant to 
Art. 65 (T 276/99). 
Such incorporation of essential matter or essential features is, however, 
subject to the restrictions set out in H-IV, 2.2.1. It may be that the search 
division has requested the applicant to furnish the document referred to, in 
order to be able to carry out a meaningful search (see B-IV, 1.3). 
If, for the disclosure of the invention, a document is referred to in an 
application as originally filed, the relevant content of the reference 
Art. 65 
 

Part F – Chapter III-9 
 
document is to be considered as forming part of the content of the 
application for the purpose of citing the application under Art. 54(3) against 
later applications. For reference documents not available to the public 
before the filing date of the application this applies only if the conditions set 
out hereto in H-IV, 2.2.1 are fulfilled. 
Because of this effect under Art. 54(3), it is very important that, where a 
reference is directed only to a particular part of the document referred to, 
that part needs to be clearly identified in the reference. 
9. "Reach-through" claims 
In certain technical areas (e.g. biotechnology, pharmacy) cases occur 
where: 
(i) 
one of the following and its use in a screening method have been 
defined as the only contribution to the art 
– 
a polypeptide 
– 
a protein 
– 
a receptor 
– 
an enzyme, etc., or 
(ii) 
a new mechanism of action of such molecule has been defined. 
It may happen that such applications contain so-called "reach-through" 
claims, i.e. claims directed to a chemical compound (or the use of that 
compound) defined only in functional terms with regard to the technical 
effect it exerts on one of the above molecules. 
Typical examples of such claims would be: "An agonist/antagonist to 
polypeptide X [optionally as identified by the screening method of 
claim A]."; "An agonist/antagonist to polypeptide X [optionally as identified 
by the screening method of claim A], for use in therapy."; "An 
agonist/antagonist to polypeptide X [optionally as identified by the 
screening method of claim A], for use in the treatment of disease Y.", where 
the description indicates that polypeptide X is involved in disease Y. 
According to Art. 83 and Rule 42(1)(c), the claim must contain sufficient 
technical disclosure of the solution to the problem. A functional definition of 
a chemical compound ("reach-through" claim) covers all compounds 
possessing the activity or effect specified in the claim. It would be an undue 
burden 
to 
isolate 
and 
characterise 
all 
potential 
compounds 
(e.g. agonists/antagonists), without any effective pointer to their identity 
(see F-III, 1), or to test every known compound and every conceivable 
future compound for this activity to see if it falls within the scope of the 
claim. In effect, the applicant is attempting to patent what has not yet been 
invented, and the fact that the applicant can test for the effect used to 
define the compounds does not necessarily confer sufficiency on the claim; 
in fact it constitutes an invitation for the skilled person to perform a research 
Part F – Chapter III-10 

 
 
programme 
(see T 435/91 
(Reasons 2.2.1), 
followed 
by 
T 1063/06 
(Headnote II)). 
In general, claims directed to merely functionally defined chemical 
compounds that are to be found by means of a new kind of research tool 
(e.g. using a new screening method based on a newly discovered molecule 
or a new mechanism of action) are directed to future inventions, for which 
patent protection under the EPC is not designed. In the case of such 
"reach-through" claims, it is both reasonable and imperative to limit the 
subject-matter of the claims to the actual contribution to the art 
(see T 1063/06 (Headnote I)). 
10. Sufficiency of disclosure and Rules 56 and 56a 
Missing parts under Rule 56 and correct application documents or parts 
under Rule 56a may be withdrawn within one month of a notification on 
redating in order to maintain the original filing date, and these parts are 
then deemed to be no longer part of the application (see also 
A-II, 5.4.2 and 5.5, A-II, 6.5, C-III, 1, H-IV, 2.2.2 and H-IV, 2.2.3). 
Under Rule 56a(4), documents or parts filed erroneously cannot be 
withdrawn and may only be removed by amending the application in 
compliance with Art. 123(2). 
In this case, the division must carefully evaluate whether the invention is 
still sufficiently disclosed without relying on the technical information 
contained in the withdrawn missing parts. If the division reaches the 
conclusion that the requirements of Art. 83 are not satisfied, a 
corresponding objection is raised. Ultimately, the application may be 
refused for lack of sufficient disclosure (see F-III, 3 to 5). 
11. Sufficiency of disclosure and clarity 
An ambiguity in the claims may lead to an insufficiency objection. However, 
ambiguity also relates to the scope of the claims, i.e. Art. 84 (see F-IV, 4). 
Normally, therefore, an ambiguity in a claim will lead to an objection under 
Art. 83 only if the whole scope of the claim is affected, in the sense that it is 
impossible to carry out at all the invention defined therein. Otherwise an 
objection under Art. 84 is appropriate (see T 608/07, T 1811/13). 
In particular (see T 593/09), where a claim contains an ill-defined 
("unclear", "ambiguous") parameter (see also F-IV, 4.11) and where, as a 
consequence, a person skilled in the art would not know whether they were 
working within or outside of the scope of the claim, this, by itself, is not a 
reason to deny sufficiency of disclosure as required by Art. 83. Nor is such 
a lack of clear definition necessarily a matter for objection under Art. 84 
only. What is decisive for establishing insufficiency within the meaning of 
Art. 83 is whether the parameter, in the specific case, is so ill-defined that a 
person skilled in the art is not able, on the basis of the disclosure as a 
whole and using common general knowledge, to identify (without undue 
burden) the technical measures necessary to solve the problem underlying 
the application at issue, e.g. see T 61/14. 
 

Part F – Chapter III-11 
 
There is a delicate balance between Art. 83 and Art. 84, which has to be 
assessed on the merits of each individual case. Care has therefore to be 
taken in opposition that an insufficiency objection is not merely a hidden 
objection under Art. 84, especially in the case of ambiguities in the claims 
(T 608/07). On the other hand, even though lack of support/clarity is not a 
ground for opposition (see also F-IV, 6.4), a problem related to it may in 
fact be of concern under Art. 83. 
12. Sufficiency of disclosure and inventive step 
If the claimed invention lacks reproducibility, this may become relevant 
under the requirements of sufficiency of disclosure or inventive step. The 
technical effect achieved by the invention solves the problem which 
underlies the application. If an invention lacks reproducibility because its 
desired technical effect as expressed in the claim is not achieved, this 
results in a lack of sufficient disclosure, which has to be objected to under 
Art. 83. Otherwise, i.e. if the effect is not expressed in the claim but is part 
of the problem to be solved, there is a problem of inventive step (see 
G 1/03, Reasons 2.5.2, T 1079/08, T 1319/10, T 5/06 and T 380/05). 
See F-III, 3 for cases where successful performance of the invention is 
inherently impossible because it would be contrary to the well-established 
laws of physics. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-1 
 
Chapter IV – Claims (Art. 84 and formal 
requirements) 
1. General 
The application must contain "one or more claims". 
These must: 
(i) 
"define the matter for which protection is sought"; 
(ii) 
"be clear and concise"; and 
(iii) 
"be supported by the description". 
Since the extent of the protection conferred by a European patent or 
application is determined by the claims (interpreted with the help of the 
description and the drawings), clarity of the claims is of the utmost 
importance (see also F-IV, 4). 
2. Form and content of claims 
2.1 Technical features 
The claims must be drafted in terms of the "technical features of the 
invention". This means that claims must not contain any statements 
relating, for example, to commercial advantages or other matters not 
related to "carrying out" the invention, but statements of purpose are 
allowed if they assist in defining the invention. 
It is not necessary that every feature is expressed in terms of a structural 
limitation. Functional features may be included provided that a skilled 
person would have no difficulty in providing some means of performing this 
function without exercising inventive skill (see F-IV, 6.5). For the specific 
case of a functional definition of a pathological condition, see F-IV, 4.21. 
Claims to the use of the invention, in the sense of the technical application 
thereof, are allowable. 
2.2 Two-part form 
Rule 43(1)(a) and (b) define the two-part form which a claim must have 
"wherever appropriate". 
The first part or "preamble" needs to contain a statement indicating "the 
designation of the subject-matter of the invention", i.e. the general technical 
class of apparatus, process, etc. to which the invention relates, followed by 
a statement of "those technical features which are necessary for the 
definition of the claimed subject-matter but which, in combination, are part 
of the prior art". This requirement to state prior-art features in the first part 
of the claim is applicable only to independent claims and not to dependent 
claims (see F-IV, 3.4). It is clear from the wording of Rule 43 that it is 
necessary only to refer to those prior-art features which are relevant to the 
invention. For example, if the invention relates to a photographic camera 
Art. 78(1)(c) 
Art. 84 
Art. 69(1) 
Rule 43(1) 
Rule 43(1) 
Part F – Chapter IV-2 

 
 
but the inventive step relates entirely to the shutter, it would be sufficient for 
the first part of the claim to read: "A photographic camera including a focal 
plane shutter" and there is no need to refer also to the other known features 
of a camera such as the lens and view-finder. 
The second part or "characterising portion" needs to state the features 
which the invention adds to the prior art, i.e. the technical features for 
which, in combination with the features stated in the first part, protection is 
sought. 
If a single document in the state of the art according to Art. 54(2), e.g. cited 
in the search report, reveals that one or more features in the second part of 
the claim were already known in combination with all the features in the first 
part of the claim and in that combination have the same effect as they have 
in the full combination according to the invention, the division will require 
that such feature or features be transferred to the first part. 
Where, however, a claim relates to a novel combination, and where the 
division of the features of the claim between the preamble and the 
characterising part could be made in more than one way without 
inaccuracy, applicants must not be pressed, unless there are very 
substantial reasons, to adopt a different division of the features from that 
which they have chosen, if their version is not incorrect. If the applicant 
insists on including more features in the preamble than can be derived from 
the closest available prior art, this is accepted. 
If no other prior art is available, this first part of the claim could be used to 
raise an objection on the ground of lack of inventive step (see G-VII, 5.1, 
last paragraph). 
2.3 Two-part form unsuitable 
Subject to what is stated in F-IV, 2.3.2, final sentence, applicants are 
required to follow the above two-part formulation in their independent claim 
or claims, where, for example, it is clear that their invention resides in a 
distinct improvement in an old combination of parts or steps. However, as is 
indicated by Rule 43, this form need be used only in appropriate cases. The 
nature of the invention may be such that this form of claim is unsuitable, 
e.g. because it would give a distorted or misleading picture of the invention 
or the prior art. Examples of the kind of invention which may require a 
different presentation are: 
(i) 
the combination of known integers of equal status, the inventive step 
lying solely in the combination; 
(ii) 
the modification of, as distinct from addition to, a known chemical 
process e.g. by omitting one substance or substituting one substance 
for another; and 
(iii) 
a complex system of functionally interrelated parts, the inventive step 
concerning changes in several of these or in their interrelationships. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-3 
 
In examples (i) and (ii), the Rule 43 form of claim may be artificial and 
inappropriate, whilst in example (iii) it might lead to an inordinately lengthy 
and involved claim. Another example in which the Rule 43 form of claim 
may be inappropriate is where the invention is a new chemical compound 
or group of compounds. It is likely also that other cases will arise in which 
the applicant is able to adduce convincing reasons for formulating the claim 
in a different form. 
2.3.1 No two-part form 
There is a special instance in which the Rule 43 form of claim is avoided. 
This is when the only relevant prior art is another European patent 
application falling within the terms of Art. 54(3). Such prior art must 
however be clearly acknowledged in the description (see F-II, 4.3, 
penultimate paragraph, and F-II, 4.4). 
2.3.2 Two-part form "wherever appropriate" 
When examining whether or not a claim is to be put in the form provided for 
in Rule 43(1), second sentence, it is important to assess whether this form 
is "appropriate". In this respect the purpose of the two-part form is to allow 
the skilled person to see clearly which features necessary for the definition 
of the claimed subject-matter are, in combination, part of the prior art. If this 
is sufficiently clear from the indication of prior art made in the description, to 
meet the requirement of Rule 42(1)(b), the two-part form is not insisted 
upon. 
2.4 Formulae and tables 
The claims, as well as the description, may contain chemical or 
mathematical formulae but not drawings (see the decision of the President 
dated 25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113, Art. 2(8)). The claims may 
contain tables but "only if their subject-matter makes the use of tables 
desirable". In view of the use of the word "desirable" in this decision, the 
division does not object to the use of tables in claims where this form is 
convenient. 
3. Kinds of claim 
3.1 Categories 
The EPC refers to different "categories" of claim ("products, process, 
apparatus or use"). For many inventions, claims in more than one category 
are needed for full protection. In fact, there are only two basic kinds of 
claim, viz. claims to a physical entity (product, apparatus) and claims to an 
activity (process, use). The first basic kind of claim ("product claim") 
includes a substance or compositions (e.g. chemical compound or a 
mixture of compounds) as well as any physical entity (e.g. object, article, 
apparatus, machine, or system of co-operating apparatus) which is 
produced by a person's technical skill. Examples are: "a steering 
mechanism incorporating an automatic feed-back circuit ..."; "a woven 
garment comprising ..."; "an insecticide consisting of X, Y, Z"; or "a 
communication system comprising a plurality of transmitting and receiving 
stations". The second basic kind of claim ("process claim") is applicable to 
all kinds of activities in which the use of some material product for effecting 
the process is implied; the activity may be exercised upon material 
Art. 54(3) 
Rule 43(2) 
Part F – Chapter IV-4 

 
 
products, upon energy, upon other processes (as in control processes) or 
upon living things (see, however, G-II, 4.2 and G-II, 5.4). 
Rule 43(2) in combination with Rule 44(1) should be construed as 
permitting the inclusion of any one of the following combinations of claims 
of different categories in the same application: 
(i) 
in addition to an independent claim for a given product, an 
independent claim for a process specially adapted for the 
manufacture of said product and an independent claim for a use of 
said product; or 
(ii) 
in addition to an independent claim for a given process, an 
independent claim for an apparatus or means specifically designed 
for carrying out said process; or 
(iii) 
in addition to an independent claim for a given product, an 
independent claim for a process specially adapted for the 
manufacture of said product and an independent claim for an 
apparatus or means specifically designed for carrying out said 
process. 
However, while a single set of independent claims according to any one of 
the combinations (i), (ii) or (iii) above is always permissible, a plurality of 
such sets of independent claims in one European patent application can 
only be allowed if the specific circumstances defined in Rule 43(2)(a) to 
Rule 43(2)(c) apply and the requirements of Art. 82 and Art. 84 are met. 
The proliferation of independent claims arising out of a combined effect of 
this kind may therefore be allowed only by way of an exception. 
If the subject-matter of a European patent is a process, the protection 
conferred by the patent extends to the products directly obtained by such a 
process. 
3.2 Number of independent claims 
According to Rule 43(2), as applicable to all European patent applications, 
the number of independent claims is limited to one independent claim in 
each category. 
Exceptions from this rule can only be admitted in the specific circumstances 
defined in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of this rule, provided the 
requirement of Art. 82 with regard to unity is met (see F-V). 
The following are examples of typical situations falling within the scope of 
the exceptions from the principle of one independent claim per category: 
(i) 
Examples of a plurality of interrelated products (Rule 43(2)(a)) 
– 
plug and socket 
– 
transmitter – receiver 
Art. 82 
Art. 64(2) 
Rule 43(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-5 
 
– 
intermediate(s) and final chemical product 
– 
gene – gene construct – host – protein – medicament 
For the purpose of Rule 43(2)(a), the term "interrelated" is interpreted 
to mean "different objects that complement each other or work 
together". In addition, Rule 43(2)(a) can be interpreted as covering 
apparatus claims, since the term "products" is considered to include 
apparatuses. Likewise, it may include systems, sub-systems and 
sub-units of such systems, as long as these entities are interrelated. 
Interrelated methods claims may also fall under the exception of 
Rule 43(2)(a). 
(ii) 
Examples of a plurality of different inventive uses of a product or 
apparatus (Rule 43(2)(b)) 
– 
claims directed to further medical uses when a first medical 
use is known (see G-II, 4.2) 
– 
claims directed to the use of compound X for multiple 
purposes, e.g. for cosmetically fortifying hair and for promoting 
hair growth 
(iii) 
Examples 
of 
alternative 
solutions 
to 
a 
particular 
problem 
(Rule 43(2)(c)) 
– 
a group of chemical compounds 
– 
two or more processes for the manufacture of such 
compounds 
(iv) 
Examples of allowable claim types 
– 
Claims directed to multiple methods involving a novel and 
inventive polypeptide P, e.g. an enzyme that controls a 
specific step in the synthesis of a compound: 
a method for manufacturing the polypeptide P, 
a method for manufacturing the compound by using either the 
isolated polypeptide or host cells expressing said polypeptide, 
a method for selecting a host cell based on whether or not it 
expresses the polypeptide of the invention. 
– 
A data sending method for sending a data packet between a 
plurality of devices coupled to a bus; 
a data receiving method for receiving a data packet between a 
plurality of devices coupled to a bus. 
Part F – Chapter IV-6 

 
 
– 
Methods of operating a data-processing system comprising 
steps 
A, B, … 
– 
a 
data-processing 
apparatus/system 
comprising means for carrying out said method – a computer 
program [product] adapted to perform said method – a 
computer-readable storage medium/data carrier comprising 
said program; 
Note however that when several independent claims are directed to 
equivalent embodiments that are not sufficiently different (e.g. computer 
program adapted to perform said method, optionally carried on an electric 
carrier signal – computer program comprising software code adapted to 
perform method steps A, B …), the exceptions under Rule 43(2) usually do 
not apply. 
For the purpose of Rule 43(2)(c), the term "alternative solutions" can be 
interpreted as "different or mutually exclusive possibilities". Moreover, if it is 
possible to cover alternative solutions by a single claim, the applicant 
should do so. For example, overlaps and similarities in the features of the 
independent claims of the same category are an indication that it would be 
appropriate to replace such claims with a single independent claim, e.g. by 
selecting a common wording for the essential features (see F-IV, 4.5). 
3.3 Objection under Rule 43(2) or Rule 137(5) 
Where an unjustified plurality of independent claims in the same category 
persists after the search (see B-VIII, 4.1 and B-VIII, 4.2) in the application 
under examination, an objection is raised under Rule 43(2). If no 
Rule 62a(1) invitation was sent at the search stage, the examining division 
can still raise an objection under Rule 43(2). If the application is a 
Euro-PCT application not subject to the preparation of a supplementary 
European search report (see B-II, 4.3.1), an objection under Rule 43(2) 
may also arise in examination. 
When an objection under Rule 43(2) arises, the applicant is invited to 
amend the claims appropriately. If the search was restricted in accordance 
with Rule 62a, and the examining division upholds the objection under 
Rule 43(2) despite possible counter-arguments provided by the applicant in 
response to the invitation under Rule 62a(1) (see B-VIII, 4.2.2) or to the 
search opinion under Rule 70a (see B-X, 8), the claims must be amended 
in such a way as to result in the removal of all subject-matter excluded from 
the search (Rule 62a(2)) and the description amended accordingly 
(see H-II, 5). 
If in reply to the reasoned objection (raised or confirmed in a 
communication from the examining division) the additional independent 
claims are maintained and no convincing arguments are presented that one 
of the situations referred to in sub-paragraphs Rule 43(2)(a) to (c) applies, 
the application may be refused under Art. 97(2). 
If the application is amended to provide a set of claims complying with 
Rule 43(2), but containing one or more claims directed to subject-matter 
excluded from the search in accordance with Rule 62a(1), an objection 
under Rule 137(5) arises and such amendments may not be admitted (see 
Rule 43(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-7 
 
also H-IV, 4 and H-IV, 4.1.1). However, before such a decision can be 
taken, it will be necessary to allow the applicant to comment according to 
Art. 113(1) on the underlying issue of whether or not the claims in respect 
of which the invitation under Rule 62a(1) was sent did in fact comply with 
Rule 43(2). 
The burden of proof concerning an objection under Rule 43(2) is initially 
shifted onto the applicant, i.e. it is up to the applicant to argue convincingly 
why additional independent claims can be maintained. For example, the 
mere statement that the number of claims is the minimum necessary to 
provide the overall scope of protection which the applicant seeks is not a 
convincing argument (see T 56/01, Reasons 5). 
Where the application also lacks unity of invention, the division may raise 
an objection under either Rule 43(2) or Art. 82 or under both. The applicant 
cannot contest which of these objections has priority. 
3.4 Independent and dependent claims 
All applications will contain one or more "independent" claims directed to 
the essential features of the invention. Any such claim may be followed by 
one or more claims concerning "particular embodiments" of that invention. 
It is evident that any claim relating to a particular embodiment must 
effectively include also the essential features of the invention, and hence 
must include all the features of at least one independent claim. The term 
"particular embodiment" is construed broadly as meaning any more specific 
disclosure of the invention than that set out in the independent claim or 
claims. 
Any claim which includes all the features of any other claim is termed a 
"dependent claim". Such a claim must contain, if possible at the beginning, 
a reference to the other claim, all features of which it includes (see, 
however, F-IV, 3.8 for claims in different categories). Since a dependent 
claim does not by itself define all the characterising features of the 
subject-matter which it claims, expressions such as "characterised in that" 
or "characterised by" are not necessary in such a claim but are 
nevertheless permissible. A claim defining further particulars of an invention 
may include all the features of another dependent claim by referring back to 
that claim. Also, in some cases, a dependent claim may define a particular 
feature or features which may appropriately be added to more than one 
previous claim (independent or dependent). It follows that there are several 
possibilities: a dependent claim may refer back to one or more independent 
claims, to one or more dependent claims, or to both independent and 
dependent claims. 
It sometimes occurs that an independent claim refers explicitly to 
alternative solutions and that these alternatives are also claimed separately 
in dependent claims. Such claims may seem redundant, but may be 
important for applicants in some national procedures if they wish to restrict 
their claims. 
The division objects to such claims only if they detract from the clarity of the 
claims as a whole. 
Rule 43(3) and 
(4) 
Rule 43(4) 
Art. 84 
Part F – Chapter IV-8 

 
 
A dependent claim referring explicitly to independent claims in two 
categories as alternatives cannot be objected to on this ground alone. For 
example, if the invention relates to both a composition and a use of that 
composition, it is possible for a claim specifying further features of the 
composition to be made dependent on both the independent claim for the 
composition and the independent claim for its use. 
Objections are, however, raised to this type of claim dependency if it leads 
to a lack of clarity. 
3.5 Arrangement of claims 
All dependent claims referring back to a single previous claim and those 
referring back to several previous claims must be grouped together to the 
extent and in the most appropriate way possible. The arrangement must 
therefore be one which enables the association of related claims to be 
readily determined and their meaning in association to be readily 
construed. The division objects if the arrangement of claims is such as to 
create obscurity in the definition of the subject-matter to be protected. In 
general, however, when the corresponding independent claim is allowable, 
the division does not concern itself unduly with the subject-matter of 
dependent claims, provided it is satisfied that they are truly dependent and 
thus in no way extend the scope of protection of the invention defined in the 
corresponding independent claim (see also F-IV, 3.8). 
3.6 Subject-matter of a dependent claim 
If the two-part form is used for the independent claim(s), dependent claims 
may relate to further details of features not only of the characterising 
portion but also of the preamble. 
3.7 Alternatives in a claim 
A claim, whether independent or dependent, may refer to alternatives, 
provided that the number and presentation of alternatives in a single claim 
does not make the claim obscure or difficult to construe and provided that 
the claim meets the requirements of unity (see also F-V, 3.2.1 and 3.2). In 
the case of a claim defining (chemical or non-chemical) alternatives, i.e. a 
so-called "Markush grouping", unity of invention is considered to be present 
if the alternatives are of a similar nature and can fairly be substituted for 
one another (see F-V, 3.2.5). 
3.8 Independent claims containing a reference to another claim or to 
features from a claim of another category 
A claim containing a reference to another claim is not necessarily a 
dependent claim as defined in Rule 43(4). One example of this is a claim 
referring to a claim of a different category (e.g. "Apparatus for carrying out 
the process of claim 1 ...", or "Process for the manufacture of the product of 
claim 1 ..."). Similarly, in a situation like the plug and socket example of 
F-IV, 3.2(i), a claim to the one part referring to the other co-operating part 
(e.g. "plug for co-operation with the socket of claim 1 ...") is not a 
dependent claim. In all these examples, the division carefully considers the 
extent to which the claim containing the reference necessarily involves the 
features of the claim referred to and the extent to which it does not. Indeed, 
objections on the grounds of lack of clarity and failure to state the technical 
Art. 84 
Rule 43(4) 
Art. 84 
Art. 82 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-9 
 
features (Rule 43(1)) apply to a claim which simply says "Apparatus for 
carrying out the process of claim 1". Since the change of category already 
makes the claim independent, the applicant is required to set out clearly in 
the claim the essential features of the apparatus. 
The same is true for a claim which says "Method for using an apparatus 
According to claim 1". The method claim, formulated as a use claim, lacks 
the steps that are carried out in order to use the apparatus (see F-IV, 4.16) 
and is therefore not clear. 
For claims directed to computer-implemented inventions, in which 
independent claims often comprise references to other independent claims, 
see F-IV, 3.9. 
The subject-matter of a claim in one category may also to some extent be 
defined in terms of features from another category; therefore an apparatus 
may be defined in terms of functions it is able to perform, provided the 
structure is made sufficiently clear; or a process may be defined in terms of 
essential structural features of the apparatus for carrying it out; or an 
element of an apparatus may be defined in terms of how it is made. 
However, in the wording of these claims and in the assessment of the 
claimed subject-matter, a clear distinction must be maintained between 
product claims (for a device, apparatus or system) and process claims (for 
a process, activity or use). For example, a claim for an apparatus cannot 
normally be limited only by the manner in which the apparatus is used; for 
this reason, a claim which simply reads "Apparatus Z, when used for 
carrying out process Y" is also objected to on the grounds of lack of clarity 
and failure to state the technical features (Rule 43(1)). 
No separate examination for the novelty and inventive step of a process 
claim for producing a product is necessary, provided that: 
– 
all features of the product as defined in the product claim inevitably 
(see also G-VII, 14) result from the claimed process (see F-IV, 4.5 
and T 169/88), and 
– 
the product claim is patentable. 
This also applies in the case of a claim for the use of a product, when the 
product is patentable and the use explicitly or implicitly implements all 
features of the product claim (see T 642/94 and T 1144/07). In all other 
instances, the patentability of the claim referred to does not necessarily 
imply the patentability of the independent claim containing the reference. If 
the process, product and/or use claims have different effective dates 
(see F-VI, 1 and  2), a separate examination may still be necessary in view 
of intermediate documents (see also G-VII, 14). 
3.9 Claims directed to computer-implemented inventions 
The expression "computer-implemented inventions" (CII) covers claims 
which involve computers, computer networks or other programmable 
apparatus, whereby at least one feature is realised by means of a program. 
Part F – Chapter IV-10 

 
 
Claims directed to CII should define all the features which are essential for 
the technical effect of the process which the computer program is intended 
to carry out when it is run (see F-IV, 4.5.2, last sentence). An objection 
under Art. 84 may arise if the claims contain program listings. Short 
excerpts from programs may be accepted in the description (see F-II, 4.12). 
In the following three sections, a distinction is made between three 
situations. The practice defined in F-IV, 3.9.1 is confined to inventions in 
which all the method steps can be carried out by generic data processing 
means. F-IV, 3.9.2, on the other hand, relates to inventions in which at least 
one method step defines the use of specific data processing means or 
other technical devices. Inventions that are realised in a distributed 
computing environment are discussed in F-IV, 3.9.3. 
3.9.1 Cases where all method steps can be fully implemented by 
generic data processing means 
A common type of CII relates to subject-matter where all the method steps 
can fully be carried out by computer program instructions running on means 
which, in the context of the invention, provide generic data processing 
functions. Such means can, for example, be embedded in a personal 
computer, smartphone, printer etc. In such inventions, although different 
claim structures are possible, the set of claims usually starts with a method 
claim. Further claims in other categories with subject-matter corresponding 
to that of the method may be included to obtain complete protection of the 
invention. If the invention concerns software which can be loaded into 
memory, transmitted over a network or distributed on a data carrier, a claim 
to a computer program [product] may also be present in addition to a 
computer-implemented method. The category of a computer program 
[product] 
claim 
is 
distinguished 
from 
that 
of 
a 
corresponding 
computer-implemented method (T 424/03 and G 3/08). The following 
non-exhaustive list comprises examples of acceptable claim formulations 
(T 410/96, T 1173/97 and T 2140/08) in such a set of claims: 
(i) 
Method claim (claim 1) 
– 
A computer-implemented method comprising steps A, B, ... 
– 
A method carried out by a computer comprising steps A, B, ... 
(ii) 
Apparatus/device/system claim (claim 2) 
– 
A data processing apparatus/device/system comprising means 
for carrying out [the steps of] the method of claim 1. 
– 
A data processing apparatus/device/system comprising means 
for carrying out step A, means for carrying out step B, ... 
– 
A data processing apparatus/device/system comprising a 
processor adapted to/configured to perform [the steps of] the 
method of claim 1. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-11 
 
(iii) 
Computer program [product] claim (claim 3) 
– 
A computer program [product] comprising instructions which, 
when the program is executed by a computer, cause the 
computer to carry out [the steps of] the method of claim 1. 
– 
A computer program [product] comprising instructions which, 
when the program is executed by a computer, cause the 
computer to carry out steps A, B, .... 
(iv) 
Computer-readable [storage] medium/data carrier claim (claim 4) 
– 
A computer-readable [storage] medium comprising instructions 
which, when executed by a computer, cause the computer to 
carry out [the steps of] the method of claim 1. 
– 
A computer-readable [storage] medium comprising instructions 
which, when executed by a computer, cause the computer to 
carry out steps A, B, ... 
– 
A computer-readable data carrier having stored thereon the 
computer program [product] of claim 3. 
– 
A data carrier signal carrying the computer program [product] 
of claim 3. 
In formulation (ii) above, apparatus features of the means-plus-function 
type ("means for ...") are interpreted as means adapted to carry out the 
respective steps/functions, rather than merely means suitable for carrying 
them out (T 410/96). There is no particular preference of wording among 
"comprising means for", "adapted to", "configured to" or equivalents. In this 
way, novelty is conferred over an unprogrammed data processing 
apparatus or a data processing apparatus programmed to perform a 
different function. 
An objection under Rule 43(2) is not raised if the claim set comprises one 
claim from each of the above formulations (i)-(iv). In these cases, an 
invitation under Rule 62a(1) is therefore not sent at the search stage since 
the requirements of Rule 43(2) are fulfilled. 
However, an objection under Rule 43(2) is raised if there are multiple 
independent claims present from a given heading (i)-(iv) and they do not fall 
under the exceptions of Rule 43(2) (F-IV, 3.2) (e.g. two or more computer 
program [product] claims which cannot be considered as falling under one 
of the exceptions of Rule 43(2)). 
When assessing the novelty and inventive step of a set of claims as defined 
above (formulations (i)-(iv)), the division usually starts with the method 
claim. If the subject-matter of the method claim is considered novel and 
inventive, the subject-matter of the other claims in a set formulated in 
accordance with the headings above will normally be novel and inventive 
Part F – Chapter IV-12 

 
 
as well, provided they comprise the features corresponding to all those 
which assure the patentability of the method. 
Claims related to CII which are formulated differently to those in the 
formulations (i)-(iv) defined above are assessed on a case-by-case basis in 
view of the requirements of clarity, novelty and inventive step (see also 
F-IV, 3.9.2). 
For example, when the invention is realised in a distributed computing 
environment or involves interrelated products, it may be necessary to refer 
to the specific features of the different entities and to define how they 
interact to ensure the presence of all essential features, rather than making 
a mere reference to another claim as in the above formulations (ii)-(iv). In 
such cases, further independent claims to interrelated products and their 
corresponding methods may also be allowable under Rule 43(2)(a) 
(F-IV, 3.2 and F-IV, 3.9.3). 
Similarly, if user interaction is required, an objection under Art. 84 may 
arise if it is not possible to determine from the claim which steps are carried 
out by the user. 
Furthermore, a claim to a computer-implemented data structure in addition 
to formulations (i)-(iv) may be allowable under Rule 43(2) if it is defined by 
its own technical features, e.g. by a well-defined structure as in T 858/02, 
possibly with references to the corresponding method or system in which it 
is used. However, a computer-implemented data structure does not 
necessarily comprise features of the process by which it is generated. It is 
not necessarily restricted by a method in which it is used, either. Therefore, 
a claim to a computer-implemented data structure usually cannot be 
defined merely by reference to a method or as an outcome of a process. 
For further information on data structures, see G-II, 3.6.3. 
For the assessment of inventive step for claims comprising features related 
to exclusions under Art. 52(2), as is often the case with CII, see G-VII, 5.4. 
3.9.2 Cases where method steps define additional devices and/or 
specific data processing means 
Where a method claim includes steps defined as being carried out by 
devices other than generic data processing means, a corresponding device 
and/or computer program claim may need more than a mere reference to 
the method claim as in formulations (i)-(iv) in F-IV, 3.9.1 to fulfil the 
requirements of Art. 84 (see also F-IV, 3.8). Furthermore, if not all the 
features of the method claim are reflected in claims in other categories 
referring to the method, said claims in other categories have to be 
construed and examined separately with respect to novelty and inventive 
step. 
In particular in applied fields such as medical devices, measuring, optics, 
electro-mechanics or industrial production processes, method claims 
frequently involve steps of manipulating or interacting with technical 
physical entities by using computer control. These method steps may not 
always be fully performed by the computer and the method claim may 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-13 
 
recite specific technical means for carrying out some of the steps. In such a 
case, defining a computer program claim as in F-IV, 3.9.1(iii) will normally 
lead to an objection under Art. 84 if the step carried out by the specific 
technical means cannot be carried out by a generic data processing means 
(see Example 1 below). An objection under Art. 84 may also arise if the 
claims do not define which steps are carried out by the data processor or 
by the additional devices involved, as well as their interactions. The same 
applies if specific data processing means (e.g. a particular parallel 
computer architecture) are required as opposed to the generic data 
processing means described in F-IV, 3.9.1. 
On the other hand, if the method claim defines the further processing, by 
generic computational means, of data received from specific technical 
means, such as sensors, it is not necessary that the computer or computer 
program claims referring to the method comprise those specific technical 
means. In this case the specific technical means recited in the method are 
not required for carrying out the method steps and formulations as in 
F-IV, 3.9.1 may be appropriate (see Example 2 below). 
Finally, as is the case for any essential feature, if the specific technical 
means are essential for defining the invention, they have to be present in all 
the independent claims. Whether or not a feature is essential is decided 
according to the principles defined in F-IV, 4.5 and subsections, taking due 
account of implicit features (F-IV, 4.5.4). 
Example 1 
1. 
A method of determining oxygen saturation in blood in a pulse 
oximeter, comprising: 
– 
receiving in an electromagnetic detector first and second 
electromagnetic radiation signals from a blood-perfused tissue 
portion corresponding to two different wavelengths of light; 
– 
normalising said electromagnetic signals according to steps A, 
B and C to provide normalised electromagnetic signals; 
– 
determining oxygen saturation based on said normalised 
electromagnetic signals according to steps D and E. 
2. 
A pulse oximeter having an electromagnetic detector and means 
adapted to execute the steps of the method of claim 1. 
3. 
A computer program [product] comprising instructions to cause the 
device of claim 2 to execute the steps of the method of claim 1. 
4. 
A computer-readable medium having stored thereon the computer 
program of claim 3. 
Remarks: In this example, the method claim comprises a step which is 
defined as being executed by specific technical means (the electromagnetic 
detector in a pulse oximeter). A computer program claim making reference 
Part F – Chapter IV-14 

 
 
only to the method would lack clarity because such a program could not be 
executed e.g. on a general-purpose computer which does not have a pulse 
oximeter with an electromagnetic detector. Therefore, the computer 
program claim should be defined as being executed on the pulse oximeter 
with an electromagnetic detector (by referring to the device of claim 2) 
rather than only referring to the method claim 1. 
Example 2 
1. 
A computer-implemented method of determining oxygen saturation in 
blood, comprising: 
– 
receiving data representing first and second electromagnetic 
radiation signals acquired by an electromagnetic detector from 
a blood-perfused tissue portion corresponding to two different 
wavelengths of light; 
– 
normalising the data representing said electromagnetic signals 
according to steps A, B and C to provide normalised data; 
– 
determining oxygen saturation based on said normalised data 
according to steps D and E. 
2. 
A data processing apparatus comprising means for carrying out the 
method of claim 1. 
3. 
A computer program [product] comprising instructions which, when 
the program is executed by a computer, cause the computer to carry 
out the method of claim 1. 
4. 
A computer-readable medium having stored thereon the computer 
program [product] of claim 3. 
Remarks: In this example the invention lies in the further processing of 
acquired data for determining the oxygen saturation in blood. The data can 
be received for example from a data file storing data previously acquired by 
the electromagnetic detector. Such a method can therefore be carried out 
by generic data processing means, for example in the form of a desktop 
computer. It does not specify the electromagnetic detector as a required 
feature for receiving the input data. Hence, the device claim defined by 
reference to the method claim does not need to include the pulse oximeter 
or an electromagnetic detector either. Furthermore, the computer program 
claim can be executed on a general-purpose computer and not on a 
specific device in contrast to the case in Example 1. As a result, the 
formulations as in F-IV, 3.9.1 are appropriate for claims 2-4 of Example 2. 
3.9.3 Cases where the invention is realised in a distributed 
computing environment 
Another common type of CII is realised in a distributed computing 
environment. Examples are a networked client (e.g. a smartphone) and 
server system, accessing storage or processing resources of a computer 
cloud, devices in a peer-to-peer network performing file sharing, an 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-15 
 
augmented reality environment with head mounted displays, autonomous 
vehicles interacting over an ad hoc network or maintaining a distributed 
ledger using a blockchain. 
For such distributed CIIs, the claim set may comprise claims directed to 
each entity of the distributed system and/or to the overall system and the 
corresponding methods. Such a claim set may be allowable under 
Rule 43(2)(a) (F-IV, 3.2). Each independent claim must nevertheless fulfil 
the requirements for patentability, in particular the requirements of Art. 54, 
Art. 56 and Art. 84. For example, if the invention lies in the implementation 
of a computer cloud using virtual machines enabling adaptation to workload 
changes by allocating resources in an automatic manner, a client device 
accessing the resources of the cloud may already be known in the art. The 
claim set must also fulfil the requirements of unity. 
It may be necessary to refer to the specific features of the different entities 
and to define how they interact to ensure the presence of all essential 
features. When referring to the interaction between the different entities, 
particular care must be taken that the claim is clear. In some situations, it 
may be necessary to limit the claim to the combination of the entities 
(see F-IV, 4.14). If the distribution of the steps of a method across the 
involved entities is essential to the invention, it will be necessary to define 
which method step is carried out by which entity in order to fulfil the 
requirements of Art. 84. Otherwise, this may be left undefined in generic CII 
claims (see F-IV, 3.9.1). 
Some considerations relating to these requirements are illustrated with the 
help of the following examples. Other formulations (F-IV, 3.9.1) than the 
ones given in the examples can also be part of the claim set but have been 
omitted for reasons of brevity. 
Example 
1. 
A transmitter device comprising means for encoding data by 
performing steps A and B and means to transmit the encoded data to 
a receiver device. 
2. 
A receiver device comprising means for receiving encoded data from 
a transmitter device and means for decoding the data by performing 
steps C and D. 
3. 
A system comprising a transmitter device according to claim 1 and a 
receiver device according to claim 2. 
4. 
A computer program [product] comprising instructions which, when 
the program is executed by a first computer, cause the first computer 
to encode data by performing steps A and B and to transmit the 
encoded data to a second computer. 
5. 
A computer program [product] comprising instructions which, when 
the program is executed by a second computer, cause the second 
Part F – Chapter IV-16 

 
 
computer to receive encoded data from a first computer and decode 
the received data by performing steps C and D. 
Remarks: The problem addressed by the invention is the transmission of 
data over a network. The transmitter device encodes the data using an 
algorithm comprising steps A and B and the receiver device performs the 
complementary function of decoding the data using an algorithm 
comprising steps C and D. The requirements of Rule 43(2) are fulfilled 
since the devices of claims 1 and 2 are interrelated in that they interact to 
perform the invention and solve the stated problem. Novelty and inventive 
step have to be assessed for each independent claim individually. For 
example, if encoding according to steps A and B enables encoding to a 
known coding format in a more efficient way, and decoding according to 
steps C and D is conventional, it may be that only claims 1, 3 and 4 are 
new and inventive. 
4. 
Clarity and interpretation of claims 
4.1 Clarity 
The requirement that the claims must be clear applies to individual claims, 
i.e. to independent and dependent claims alike, and also to the claims as a 
whole. The clarity of the claims is of the utmost importance in view of their 
function in defining the matter for which protection is sought. Therefore, the 
meaning of the terms of a claim must, as far as possible, be clear for the 
person skilled in the art from the wording of the claim alone (see also 
F-IV, 4.2). In view of the differences in the scope of protection which may 
be attached to the various categories of claims, the division must ensure 
that the wording of a claim leaves no doubt as to its category. 
Where it is found that the claims lack clarity under Art. 84, this may have 
led to the issuing of a partial European or supplementary European search 
report under Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 and 3.2). In such cases, in the 
absence of appropriate amendment and/or convincing arguments from the 
applicant as to why the invitation under Rule 63(1) was not justified, an 
objection under Rule 63(3) will also arise (see H-II, 5). 
4.2 Interpretation 
Each claim must be read giving the words the meaning and scope which 
they normally have in the relevant art, unless in particular cases the 
description gives the words a special meaning, by explicit definition or 
otherwise. Moreover, if such a special meaning applies, the division will, so 
far as possible, require the claim to be amended whereby the meaning is 
clear from the wording of the claim alone. This is important because it is 
only the claims of the European patent, not the description, which will be 
published in all the official languages of the EPO. The claim must also be 
read with an attempt to make technical sense out of it. Such a reading may 
involve a departure from the strict literal meaning of the wording of the 
claims. Art. 69 and its Protocol do not provide a basis for excluding what is 
literally covered by the terms of the claims (see T 223/05). 
Art. 84 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-17 
 
4.3 Inconsistencies 
Any inconsistency between the description and the claims must be avoided 
if it casts doubt on the subject-matter for which protection is sought and 
therefore render the claim unclear or unsupported under Art. 84, second 
sentence, or, alternatively, render the claim objectionable under Art. 84, 
first sentence. Such inconsistency can be of the following kinds: 
(i) 
Simple verbal inconsistency 
For example, there is a statement in the description which suggests 
that the invention is limited to a particular feature but the claims are 
not thus limited; also, the description places no particular emphasis 
on this feature and there is no reason for believing that the feature is 
essential for the performance of the invention. In such a case, the 
inconsistency can be removed either by broadening the description 
or by limiting the claims. Similarly, if the claims are more limited than 
the description, the claims may be broadened or the description may 
be limited. See also paragraph (iii) below. 
(ii) 
Inconsistency regarding apparently essential features 
For example, it may appear, either from general technical knowledge 
or from what is stated or implied in the description, that a certain 
described technical feature not mentioned in an independent claim is 
essential to the performance of the invention, or, in other words, is 
necessary for the solution of the problem to which the invention 
relates. In such a case, the claim does not meet the requirements of 
Art. 84, because Art. 84, first sentence, when read in conjunction with 
Rule 43(1) and (3), has to be interpreted as meaning not only that an 
independent claim must be comprehensible from a technical point of 
view but also that it must clearly define the subject-matter of the 
invention, that is to say indicate all the essential features thereof 
(see T 32/82). If, in response to this objection, the applicants show 
convincingly, e.g. by means of additional documents or other 
evidence, that the feature is in fact not essential, they may be 
allowed to retain the unamended claim and, where necessary, to 
amend the description instead. The opposite situation in which an 
independent claim includes features which do not seem essential for 
the performance of the invention is not objectionable. This is a matter 
of the applicant's choice. The division therefore does not suggest that 
a claim be broadened by the omission of apparently inessential 
features; 
(iii) 
Part of the description and/or drawings is inconsistent with the 
subject-matter for which protection is sought 
– 
Description inconsistent with independent claim(s) 
According to Art. 84, second sentence, the claims must be 
supported by the description. This means that there must not 
be inconsistency between the claims and the description. 
Parts of the description that give the skilled person the 
Part F – Chapter IV-18 

 
 
impression that they disclose ways to carry out the invention 
but are not encompassed by the wording of the claims are 
inconsistent 
(or 
contradictory) 
with 
the 
claims. 
Such 
inconsistencies may be present in the application as originally 
filed or may result from amending the claims to such an extent 
that they are no longer consistent with the description or 
drawings. 
For example, an inconsistency may exist due to the presence 
of an alternative feature which has a broader or different 
meaning than a feature of the independent claim. Further, an 
inconsistency arises if the embodiment comprises a feature 
which is demonstrably incompatible with an independent 
claim. 
Moreover, features required by the independent claims may 
not be described in the description as being optional using 
wording such as "preferably", "may" or "optionally". The 
description must be amended to remove such terms if they 
make a mandatory feature of an independent claim appear as 
being optional. 
Examples: 
– 
the independent claim defines a feature as being made 
of "purely substance X", whereas the description defines 
it as being made of a blend of substances "X and Y"; 
– 
the independent claim defines the feature of an article 
comprising nicotine-free liquid material, whereas the 
description states that the liquid material may contain 
nicotine. 
However, it is not an inconsistency when an embodiment 
comprises further features which are not claimed as 
dependent claims as long as the combination of the features in 
the embodiment is encompassed by the subject-matter of an 
independent claim. Similarly, it is not an inconsistency when 
an embodiment fails to explicitly mention one or more features 
of an independent claim as long as they are present by 
reference to another embodiment or implicit. 
Example: Where the claim comprises features A, B and C 
taken in combination, the passages dealing individually with 
how each of A, B and C are realised are normally understood 
as describing the refinements of the combination defined in the 
claim unless there are indications to the contrary. The 
passages which describe only the realisation of feature A, for 
example by introducing features A1-A3 and discussing their 
advantages, but which can be interpreted as meant for being 
combined with the other features of the claim, would not need 
an amendment caused by the limitation of the claim from B to 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-19 
 
B2 unless one of A1-A3 is incompatible with B2. On the other 
hand, any passage explicitly referring to a sub-combination of 
the claimed features (e.g. only A or A+B) as being the 
invention is inconsistent with the claim. 
Subject-matter in the description regarded as an exception to 
patentability under Art. 53 needs to be excised, reworded such 
that it does not fall under the exceptions to patentability or 
prominently marked as not being according to the claimed 
invention (see G-II, 4.2 for adaptation of the description for 
methods of treatment of the human and animal body, G-II, 5.3 
for adaptation of the description for the use of human 
embryonic stem cells and G-II, 5.4 for adaptation of the 
description for plant and animals). 
For borderline cases where there is doubt as to whether an 
embodiment is consistent with the claims, the benefit of the 
doubt is given to the applicant. 
– 
Procedural aspects and examples 
The applicant must remove any inconsistencies by amending 
the 
description 
either 
by 
deleting 
the 
inconsistent 
embodiments or marking appropriately so that it is clear that 
they do not fall within the subject-matter for which protection is 
sought. See paragraph (i) above for the case where an 
inconsistency can be removed by broadening the claims. 
Example: Independent claim defines a vehicle with a broad 
feature of a "motor", together with other features. The 
description and the drawings comprise Embodiment 1, in 
which the vehicle has an electric motor, and Embodiment 2, in 
which the vehicle has a combustion engine. During the 
prosecution, in order to fulfil the requirements of inventive 
step, the independent claim is amended to specify a vehicle 
employing an electric motor since the combination of claimed 
features using a combustion engine was anticipated by the 
prior art. Embodiment 2 is no longer consistent with the 
independent claim, unless it can be inferred from this 
embodiment that the combustion engine is used in 
combination with the electric motor. This inconsistency must 
be rectified either by removing Embodiment 2 from the 
description and drawings or by marking Embodiment 2 as not 
being 
covered 
by 
the 
claimed 
subject-matter 
(e.g. 
"Embodiment 2 is not covered by the subject-matter of the 
claims" or similar wording). 
An inconsistency between the description and the claims 
cannot be removed by introducing at the beginning of the 
description a generic statement such as "embodiments not 
falling under the scope of the appended claims are to be 
considered merely as examples suitable for understanding the 
Part F – Chapter IV-20 

 
 
invention" without indicating which parts of the description are 
no longer covered. To remove the inconsistency, such a 
statement has to refer to specific embodiments (e.g. 
"Embodiments X and Y are not encompassed by the wording 
of the claims but are considered as useful for understanding 
the invention"). 
The terms "disclosure", "example", "aspect" or similar, on their 
own, do not necessarily imply that what follows is not 
encompassed by an independent claim. Unambiguous 
expressions have to be adopted to mark an inconsistent 
embodiment (e.g. by adding "not encompassed by the wording 
of the claims", "not according to the claimed invention" or 
"outside the subject-matter of the claims") instead of merely 
replacing the terms "embodiment" or "invention" by one of the 
aforementioned terms. 
As long as the resulting text of the description does not 
present conflicting information to the reader, an inconsistent 
embodiment may also be remedied by ensuring that it is not 
referred to as being "according to the invention" throughout the 
description and by complementing the reference to it with an 
explicit statement to the effect that it is retained due to being 
useful for understanding the invention (e.g. "embodiment 
useful for understanding the invention", "comparative example 
from background art". 
When inviting the applicant to amend the description, the 
division provides examples of embodiments inconsistent with 
the independent claims and brief reasons why. If the 
inconsistency concerns describing a mandatory feature of an 
independent claim as optional, the division provides an 
example passage. 
See also H-V, 2 for the allowability of amendments to the 
description. 
An inconsistency between the description/drawings and the claims may 
frequently occur when, after a limitation of the claims following an invitation 
under Rule 62a(1) or Rule 63(1), the subject-matter excluded from the 
search is still present in the description. Unless the initial objection was not 
justified, such subject-matter is objected to under Art. 84 (inconsistency 
between the claims and the description). 
Furthermore, an inconsistency between the description/drawings and the 
claims will occur when, after a non-unity objection (Rule 64 or Rule 164), 
the claims have been limited to only one of the originally claimed 
inventions: the embodiments and/or examples of the non-claimed 
inventions must be either deleted or clearly indicated as not being covered 
by the claims. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-21 
 
4.4 General statements, "spirit of the invention", claim-like clauses 
General statements in the description which imply that the extent of 
protection may be expanded in some vague and not precisely defined way 
are not allowed. In particular, any statement which refers to the extent of 
protection being expanded to cover the "spirit of the invention" or "all 
equivalents" of the claims must be deleted. 
Statements that refer to the extent of protection covering the "scope of the 
claims" or the invention being "defined in the claims" are allowed. This does 
not preclude the removal of inconsistencies (F-IV, 4.3). 
Analogously, in the case where the claims are directed to a combination of 
features, any statement that seems to imply that protection is nevertheless 
sought not only for the combination as a whole but also for individual 
features or sub-combinations thereof must be deleted. 
Finally, claim-like clauses must also be deleted or amended to avoid 
claim-like language prior to grant since they otherwise may lead to unclarity 
on the subject-matter for which protection is sought. 
"Claim-like" clauses are clauses present in the description which despite 
not being identified as a claim, appear as such and usually comprise an 
independent clause followed by a number of clauses referring to previous 
clauses. These claim-like clauses are usually found at the end of the 
description and/or in the form of numbered paragraphs, particularly in 
divisional or Euro-PCT applications, where the original set of claims from 
the parent or PCT application is appended to the description. 
4.5 Essential features 
4.5.1 Objections arising from missing essential features 
The claims, which define the matter for which protection is sought, must be 
clear, meaning not only that a claim must be comprehensible from a 
technical point of view, but also that it must define clearly all the essential 
features of the invention (see T 32/82). Furthermore, the requirement of 
Art. 84 that the claims be supported by the description applies to features 
which are explicitly presented in the description as being essential for 
carrying out the invention (see T 1055/92). A lack of essential features in 
the independent claim(s) is therefore to be dealt with under the clarity and 
support requirements. 
4.5.2 Definition of essential features 
Essential features of a claim are those necessary for achieving a technical 
effect underlying the solution of the technical problem with which the 
application is concerned (the problem usually being derived from the 
description). The independent claim(s) must therefore contain all features 
explicitly described in the description as being necessary to carry out the 
invention. Any features which, even if consistently mentioned in the context 
of the invention throughout the application, do not actually contribute to the 
solution of the problem are not essential features. 
Art. 84 
Rule 43(1) and 
(3) 
Part F – Chapter IV-22 

 
 
As a general rule, the technical effect or result produced by the feature will 
provide the key to answering the question of whether or not the feature 
contributes to solving the problem (see also G-VII, 5.2). 
If a claim is to a process for producing the product of the invention, then the 
process as claimed must be one which, when carried out in a manner 
which would seem reasonable to a person skilled in the art, necessarily has 
as its end result that particular product; otherwise there is an internal 
inconsistency and therefore lack of clarity in the claim. 
In particular, where patentability depends on a technical effect, the claims 
must be so drafted as to include all the technical features of the invention 
which are essential for the technical effect (see T 32/82). 
Claims towards plants or animals which are not exclusively produced by an 
essentially biological process comprising a functionally defined phenotypic 
trait and which are worded as product-by-process claims (i.e. obtainable by 
crossing a plant with a plant grown from deposited seed having accession 
number XXX and selecting for a progeny plant comprising the phenotypic 
trait) must fulfil the clarity requirement of Art. 84, as must any other type of 
claim. In particular, the claimed subject-matter must be defined so that the 
public is left in no doubt about what the subject-matter for which protection 
is sought actually is. If the process through which the claimed plant or 
animal is defined does not impart identifiable and unambiguous technical 
features to the plant or animal, e.g. the genetic information present in the 
genome, the claim directed to a plant or animal lacks clarity. 
4.5.3 Generalisation of essential features 
In deciding how specific the essential features must be, the provisions of 
Art. 83 must be borne in mind: it is sufficient if the application as a whole 
describes the necessary characteristics of an invention in a degree of detail 
such that a person skilled in the art can perform the invention (see F-III, 3). 
It is not necessary to include all details of the invention in the independent 
claim. Thus a certain degree of generalisation of the claimed features may 
be permitted, provided that the claimed generalised features as a whole 
allow the problem to be solved. In this case a more specific definition of the 
features is not required. This principle applies equally to structural and 
functional features. 
4.5.4 Implicit features 
As detailed above, an independent claim must specify explicitly all of the 
essential features needed to define the invention. This applies except in so 
far as such features are implied by the generic terms used, e.g. a claim to a 
"bicycle" does not need to mention the presence of wheels. 
In the case of a product claim, if the product is of a well-known kind and the 
invention lies in modifying it in certain respects, it is sufficient that the claim 
clearly identifies the product and specifies what is modified and in what 
way. Similar considerations apply to claims for an apparatus. 
4.5.5 Examples 
Examples illustrating essential features can be found in the Annex to F-IV. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-23 
 
4.6 Relative terms 
4.6.1 Clarity objections 
Relative or similar terms such as "thin", "wide" or "strong" constitute a 
potentially unclear element due to the fact that their meaning may change 
depending on the context. For these terms to be allowed, their meaning 
must be clear in the context of the whole disclosure of the application or 
patent. 
However, if a relative or similar term is used by the applicant as the only 
feature to distinguish the subject-matter of a claim from the prior art, the 
use of this term is objected to under Art. 84 unless the term has a 
well-recognised meaning in the particular art, e.g. "high-frequency" in 
relation to an amplifier, and this is the meaning intended. 
Where the relative term has no well-recognised meaning the division invites 
the applicant to replace it, if possible, by a more precise wording found 
elsewhere in the disclosure as originally filed. Where there is no basis in 
the disclosure for a clear definition and the term is no longer the only 
distinguishing feature, it may be retained in the claim, because excising it 
would generally lead to an extension of the subject-matter beyond the 
content of the application as filed – in contravention of Art. 123(2). 
4.6.2 Interpretation of relative terms 
When the use of a relative term is allowed in a claim, this term is 
interpreted by the division in the least restrictive possible way when 
determining the extension of the subject-matter of the claim. As a 
consequence, in many cases, a relative term is not limiting the extension of 
the subject-matter of a claim. 
For example, the expression "a thin metal plate" does not limit the feature 
"metal plate" against the prior art: a metal plate is "thin" only when 
compared to another one, but it does not define an objective and 
measurable thickness. So a metal plate three millimetres thick is thin when 
compared to a plate five millimetres thick, but thick when compared to a 
plate one millimetre thick. 
As another example, when considering "an element mounted near the end 
of a truck", is this element mounted 1 mm from the end of the truck, 10 cm 
or 2 m? The only limitation of such an expression is that the element must 
be nearer to the end of the truck than to its middle, i.e. the element can be 
mounted anywhere in the quarter of the truck next to the end. 
Also, unless otherwise clear from the context, the term "elastic" does not 
limit the type of material, because elasticity is an intrinsic property of any 
solid material measured by Young's modulus. In other words, taken outside 
any context an elastic material can be anything from rubber to diamond. 
Part F – Chapter IV-24 

 
 
4.7 Terms such as "about", "approximately" or "substantially" 
4.7.1 Interpretation of terms such as "about", "approximately" or 
"substantially" 
Where terms such as "about" or "approximately" are applied to a particular 
value (e.g. "about 200°C" or "approximately 200°C") or to a range 
(e.g. "about x to approximately y"), the value or range is interpreted as 
being as accurate as the method used to measure it. If no error margins are 
specified in the application, the same principles described in G-VI, 7.1 
apply, i.e. the expression "about 200°C" is interpreted as having the same 
round-off as "200°C". If error margins are specified in the application, they 
must be used in the claims in place of the expression containing "about" or 
similar terms. 
When terms such as "substantially" or "approximately" qualify a structural 
unit of an apparatus (e.g. "a tray plate with a substantially circular 
circumference" or "a tray plate with an approximately curved base"), the 
expression containing the term "substantially" or "approximately" will be 
interpreted as a technical feature being produced within the technical 
tolerance of the method used to manufacture it (e.g. cutting a metal is much 
more accurate than cutting a plastic; or cutting with a CNC machine is more 
accurate than cutting by hand) unless the application suggests otherwise. 
In other words, in the absence of any indication to the contrary in the 
application, the expression "a tray plate with a substantially circular 
circumference" is interpreted as claiming the same technical feature as "a 
tray plate with a circular circumference"; in turn both expressions are 
considered as claiming any tray whose base the skilled person in the 
manufacturing field would consider as being circular. 
The same applies when the expression containing "substantially" or 
"approximately" implies that a certain effect or result can be obtained within 
a certain tolerance and the skilled person knows how to obtain that 
tolerance. For example, "a substantially vertical seat back" is interpreted as 
allowing for a certain +/- variation around 90° where the skilled person can 
recognise that a functionality for supporting the sitting person's back is 
present. 
4.7.2 Clarity objections 
If the application suggests that the use of terms such as "about", 
"approximately" or "substantially" extends either the interval claimed by a 
value and/or range outside the error margins of the measurement system 
or the structural unit beyond the manufacturing tolerances or any other 
tolerance that the skilled person would take into consideration in the 
technical field concerned, then the wording of the claims becomes vague 
and undefined. This leads to an objection under Art. 84 because the 
presence of this wording prevents the subject-matter of the claims from 
being unambiguously distinguished from the prior art with respect to novelty 
and inventive step. 
For example, if the application suggests that an icosagon (20-sided 
polygon) is also a "substantially circular circumference" for a metal tray 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-25 
 
realised by a CNC waterjet cutting machine, this renders the scope of the 
claims unclear because: 
(i) 
the tolerance indicated by the application is outside the tolerance of 
the manufacturing method (a CNC waterjet cutting machine 
approximates a circular circumference by using a polygon with 
hundreds of sides); and 
(ii) 
if an icosagon is also a "substantially circular circumference", what 
about an enneadecagon (19-sided polygon) or an octadecagon 
(18-sided polygon)? When does a polygon stop being a "substantially 
circular circumference"? How can this be assessed objectively by the 
person skilled in the art? 
4.8 Trade marks 
The use of trade marks and similar expressions in claims is not allowed as 
it does not guarantee that the product or feature referred to is not modified 
while maintaining its name during the term of the patent. They may be 
allowed exceptionally if their use is unavoidable and they are generally 
recognised as having a precise meaning. 
With regard to the need to acknowledge trade marks as such in the 
description, see F-II, 4.14. With regard to the effect of references to trade 
marks on sufficiency of disclosure (Art. 83), see F-III, 7. 
4.9 Optional features 
Optional features, i.e. features preceded by expressions such as 
"preferably", "for example", "such as" or "more particularly" are allowed if 
they do not introduce ambiguity. In such a case, they are to be regarded as 
entirely optional. 
These expressions introduce ambiguity and render the scope of the claim 
unclear if they do not lead to a restriction of the subject-matter of the claim. 
For example, the wording "a method to manufacture an artificial stone, such 
as a clay brick" does not fulfil the requirements of Art. 84, because a clay 
brick will never be an artificial stone. Hence it is unclear if either an artificial 
stone or a clay brick is manufactured by the method of the claim. 
Analogously, the wording "the solution is heated up to between 65 and 
85°C, particularly to 90°C" does not fulfil the requirements of Art. 84 
because the temperature after the term "particularly" contradicts the range 
before it. 
4.10 Result to be achieved 
The area defined by the claims must be as precise as the invention allows. 
As a general rule, claims which attempt to define the invention by a result 
to be achieved are not allowed, in particular if they only amount to claiming 
the underlying technical problem. However, they may be allowed if the 
invention either can only be defined in such terms or cannot otherwise be 
defined more precisely without unduly restricting the scope of the claims 
and if the result is one which can be directly and positively verified by tests 
Part F – Chapter IV-26 

 
 
or procedures adequately specified in the description or known to the 
person skilled in the art and which do not require undue experimentation 
(see T 68/85). For example, the invention may relate to an ashtray in which 
a smouldering cigarette end will be automatically extinguished due to the 
shape and relative dimensions of the ashtray. The latter may vary 
considerably in a manner difficult to define whilst still providing the desired 
effect. So long as the claim specifies the construction and shape of the 
ashtray as clearly as possible, it may define the relative dimensions by 
reference to the result to be achieved, provided that the specification 
includes adequate directions to enable the skilled person to determine the 
required dimensions by routine test procedures (see F-III, 1 to F-III, 3). 
However, these cases have to be distinguished from those in which the 
product is defined by the result to be achieved and the result amounts in 
essence to the problem underlying the application. It is established case 
law that an independent claim must indicate all the essential features of the 
object of the invention in order to comply with the requirements of Art. 84 
(see G 2/88 and G 1/04). Art. 84 also reflects the general legal principle 
that the extent of monopoly conferred by a patent, as defined in the claims, 
must correspond to the technical contribution to the art. It must not extend 
to subject-matter which, after reading the description, would still not be at 
the disposal of the person skilled in the art (T 409/91). The technical 
contribution of a patent resides in the combination of features which solve 
the problem underlying the application. Therefore, if the independent claim 
defines the product by a result to be achieved and the result amounts in 
essence to the problem underlying the application, that claim must state the 
essential features necessary to achieve the result claimed (T 809/12), see 
also F-IV, 4.5. 
The 
above-mentioned 
requirements 
for 
allowing 
a 
definition 
of 
subject-matter in terms of a result to be achieved differ from those for 
allowing a definition of subject-matter in terms of functional features (see 
F-IV, 4.22 and F-IV, 6.5). 
4.11 Parameters 
Parameters are characteristic values, which may be values of directly 
measurable properties (e.g. the melting point of a substance, the flexural 
strength of a steel, the resistance of an electrical conductor) or may be 
defined as more or less complicated mathematical combinations of several 
variables in the form of formulae. 
The characteristics of a product may be specified by parameters related to 
the physical structure of the product, provided that those parameters can 
be clearly and reliably determined by objective procedures which are usual 
in the art. Where the characteristics of the product are defined by a 
mathematical relation between parameters, each parameter needs to be 
clearly and reliably determined. 
The same applies to process-related features defined by parameters. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-27 
 
The requirements of Art. 84 with regard to the characterisation of a product 
by parameters can be summarised as follows (see T 849/11): 
(i) 
the claims must be clear in themselves when read by the skilled 
person (not including knowledge derived from the description); 
(ii) 
the method for measuring a parameter (or at least a reference 
thereto) must appear completely in the claim itself; and 
(iii) 
an applicant who chooses to define the scope of the claim by 
parameters needs to ensure that the skilled person can easily and 
unambiguously verify whether they are working inside or outside the 
scope of the claim. 
If the description of the method for measuring a parameter is so long that 
its inclusion makes the claim unclear through lack of conciseness or difficult 
to understand, the requirement under point (ii) can be met by including in 
the claim a reference to the description, in accordance with Rule 43(6). 
Furthermore the requirement under point (ii) can still be met if it can be 
convincingly shown that (see T 849/11): 
(a) 
the measurement method to be employed belongs to the skilled 
person's common general knowledge, e.g. because there is only one 
method, or because a particular method is commonly used; or 
(b) 
all the measurement methodologies known in the relevant technical 
field for determining this parameter yield the same result within the 
appropriate limit of measurement accuracy. 
For further issues relating to lack of support and sufficiency of disclosure 
regarding parameters, see F-III, 11 and F-IV, 6.4. 
4.11.1 Unusual parameters 
Unusual parameters are parameters not commonly used in the field of the 
invention. Two main situations can present themselves: 
(i) 
The unusual parameter measures a property of the product/process 
for which another generally recognised parameter is used in the field 
of the invention. 
(ii) 
The unusual parameter measures a property of the product/process 
that was not measured before in the field of the invention. 
In addition to the requirements contained in F-IV, 4.11: 
– 
Cases in which an unusual parameter of type (i) is employed and no 
straightforward conversion from the unusual parameter to the 
parameter generally recognised in the art is possible, or a 
non-accessible apparatus for measuring the unusual parameter is 
used are prima facie objectionable on grounds of lack of clarity, as no 
Part F – Chapter IV-28 

 
 
meaningful comparison with the prior art can be made. Such cases 
might also disguise lack of novelty (see G-VI, 5). 
– 
Use of unusual parameters of type (ii) is allowable if it is evident from 
the application that the skilled person would face no difficulty in 
carrying out the presented tests and would thereby be able to 
establish the exact meaning of the parameter and to make a 
meaningful comparison with the prior art. In addition, the onus of 
proof that an unusual parameter is a genuine distinctive feature 
vis-à-vis the prior art lies with the applicant. No benefit of doubt can 
be accorded in this respect (see G-VI, 5). 
Example of an allowable unusual parameter of type (ii) 
The application explains that the abrasive action of sandpaper of very fine 
grade is improved if strips with abrasive grain are alternated with strips 
without abrasive grain. Claim 1 contains an unusual parameter of type (ii) 
that measures the relationship between the widths of the abrasive strips 
and the non-abrasive strips within a certain length of the sandpaper. 
The skilled person has no problem in establishing the exact meaning of the 
parameter, measuring it and determining its genuine distinctive feature 
against the prior art. 
4.12 Product-by-process claim 
A claim defining a product in terms of a process is to be construed as a 
claim to the product as such. The technical content of the invention lies not 
in the process per se, but rather in the technical properties imparted to the 
product by the process. Claims defining plants or animals produced by a 
method including a technical step which imparts a technical feature to a 
product constitute an exception in so far as the requirements of Art. 53(b) 
as interpreted by Rule 28(2) are concerned. The exclusion under Rule 
28(2) regarding plants and animals exclusively obtained by means of an 
essentially biological process does not apply to patents granted before 
1 July 2017 nor to pending patent applications with a filing date and/or a 
priority date before 1 July 2017 (see G 3/19, OJ EPO 2020, A119). 
If a technical feature of a claimed plant or animal, e.g. a single nucleotide 
exchange in the genome, can be the result of both a technical intervention 
(e.g. directed mutagenesis) and an essentially biological process (a natural 
allele), a disclaimer is necessary to delimit the claimed subject-matter to the 
technically produced product (see examples in G-II, 5.4.2.1 and G-II, 5.4). 
If, on the other hand, the feature in question can unambiguously be 
obtained by technical intervention only, e.g. a transgene, no disclaimer is 
necessary. For the general principles governing disclaimers see H-V, 4.1 
and H-V, 4.2. 
If the process through which the claimed plant or animal is defined does not 
impart identifiable and unambiguous technical features to the plant or 
animal, e.g. the genetic information present in the genome, the claim 
directed to a plant or animal lacks clarity. 
Art. 53(b) 
Rule 28(2) 
Art. 64(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-29 
 
Claims for products defined in terms of a process of manufacture are 
allowable only if the products as such fulfil the requirements for 
patentability, i.e. inter alia that they are new and inventive, and it is 
impossible to define the claimed product other than in terms of a process of 
manufacture. A product is not rendered novel merely by the fact that it is 
produced by means of a new process. The claim may for instance take the 
form "Product X obtainable by process Y". Irrespective of whether the term 
"obtainable", "obtained", "directly obtained" or an equivalent wording is 
used in the product-by-process claim, it is still directed to the product per se 
and confers absolute protection upon the product. 
As regards novelty, when a product is defined by its method of 
manufacture, the question to be answered is whether the product under 
consideration is identical to known products. The burden of proof for an 
allegedly distinguishing "product-by-process" feature lies with the applicant, 
who has to provide evidence that the modification of the process 
parameters results in another product, for example by showing that distinct 
differences exist in the properties of the products. Nevertheless, the 
division needs to furnish reasoned argumentation to support the alleged 
lack of novelty of a product-by-process claim, especially if this objection is 
contested by the applicant (see G 1/98, T 828/08). 
Similarly, examination of product or product-by-process claims in respect of 
their patentability under the EPC is unaffected by the extent of the 
protection conferred by the patent or the patent application (see G 2/12 and 
G 2/13, Reasons VIII(2)(6)(b)). 
4.12.1 Product claim with process features 
Provided that they are allowable, the process features in a product claim 
comprising both product features and process features can establish the 
novelty of the claimed product only if they cause the claimed product to 
have different properties from the products known from the prior art. As in 
the case of product-by-process claims (see F-IV, 4.12), the burden of proof 
for an allegedly distinguishing "product-by-process" feature lies with the 
applicant. 
4.13 Interpretation of expressions stating a purpose 
4.13.1 Interpretation of expressions such as "Apparatus for ...", 
"Product for ... " 
If a claim commences with such words as "Apparatus for carrying out the 
process ...", this must be construed as meaning merely apparatus suitable 
for carrying out the process. An apparatus which otherwise possesses all of 
the features specified in the claims but which is unsuitable for the stated 
purpose or requires modifications to enable it to be so used for said 
purpose, is normally not considered as anticipating the claim. 
Similar considerations apply to a claim for a product for a particular use. 
For example, if a claim refers to a "mould for molten steel", this implies 
certain limitations for the mould. Therefore, a plastic ice cube tray with a 
melting point much lower than that of steel does not come within the claim. 
Similarly, a claim to a substance or composition for a particular use is 
Art. 69 
Part F – Chapter IV-30 

 
 
construed as meaning a substance or composition which is in fact suitable 
for the stated use; a known product which prima facie is the same as the 
substance or composition defined in the claim, but which is in a form which 
renders it unsuitable for the stated use, does not deprive the claim of 
novelty. However, if the known product is in a form in which it is in fact 
suitable for the stated use, though it has never been described for that use, 
it deprives the claim of novelty. 
An exception to this general principle of interpretation is where the claim is 
to a known substance or composition for use in a surgical, therapeutic or 
diagnostic method (see G-II, 4.2 and G-VI, 6.1). 
4.13.2 Interpretation of means-plus-function features ("means for ... ") 
Means-plus-function features ("means for ...") are a type of functional 
feature and hence do not contravene the requirements of Art. 84. 
Any prior art feature suitable for carrying out the function of a 
means-plus-function feature will anticipate the latter. For example, the 
feature "means for opening a door" is anticipated by both the door key and 
a crowbar. 
An exception to this general principle of interpretation is where the function 
of the means-plus-function feature is carried out by a computer or similar 
apparatus. In this case the means-plus-function features are interpreted as 
means adapted to carry out the relevant steps/functions, rather than merely 
means suitable for carrying them out. 
Example: 
"1. 
An eyeglass lens grinding machine for processing a lens such that 
the lens is fitted in an eyeglass frame, said machine comprising: 
at least a grinding wheel for bevelling the lens; 
means for receiving frame configurational data on the eyeglass frame 
and layout data to be used in providing a layout of the lens relative to 
the eyeglass frame; 
means for detecting an edge position of the lens on the basis of the 
received frame data and layout data; 
means for determining a first bevel path by calculation based on the 
result of detection by said edge position detecting means; 
means for determining a second bevel path obtained by tilting said 
first bevel path such that said second bevel path passes through a 
desired position on a lens edge; and 
means for controlling the grinding wheel during the bevelling of the 
lens on the basis of said second bevel path." 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-31 
 
"1. 
An eyeglass lens grinding machine for processing a lens such that 
the lens is fitted in an eyeglass frame, said machine comprising 
at least a grinding wheel for bevelling the lens; 
a computer adapted to: 
– 
receive frame configurational data on the eyeglass frame and 
layout data to be used in providing a layout of the lens relative 
to the eyeglass frame; 
– 
detect an edge position of the lens on the basis of the received 
frame data and layout data; 
– 
determine a first bevel path by calculation based on the result 
of detection by said edge position detecting means; 
– 
determine a second bevel path that is obtained by tilting said 
first bevel path such that said second bevel path passes 
through a desired position on a lens edge; and 
– 
control the grinding wheel during the bevelling of the lens on 
the basis of said second bevel path." 
Each of these two claims is new over a prior art disclosing an eyeglass lens 
grinding machine comprising a grinding wheel and a computer for 
controlling the grinding wheel if the specific processing steps are not 
disclosed in the prior art. When "means for" refers to computer means, the 
processing steps being defined as "means for + function" (first claim) and 
"computer adapted to + function" (second claim) are to be interpreted as 
limiting. Therefore, a prior-art document disclosing an eyeglass lens 
grinding machine comprising at least a grinding wheel for bevelling the lens 
and a computer only anticipates these claims if the prior-art document also 
discloses that the computer is programmed to carry out the claimed steps. 
For further information on claim formulations commonly used in 
computer-implemented inventions, see F-IV, 3.9. 
4.13.3 Interpretation of expressions such as "Method for ..." 
In the context of a method, two different types of stated purpose are 
possible, namely those that define the application or use of a method, and 
those that define an effect arising from the steps of the method and are 
implicit therein (see T 1931/14). 
Where the stated purpose defines the specific application of the method, 
this purpose requires additional steps which are not implied by or inherent 
in the other remaining steps defined in the claim, and without which the 
claimed process would not achieve the stated purpose. Hence a method 
claim that defines a working method which, for example, commences with 
such words as "Method for remelting galvanic layers", the part "for 
remelting ..." is not to be understood as meaning that the process is merely 
suitable for remelting galvanic layers, but rather as a functional feature 
Part F – Chapter IV-32 

 
 
concerning the remelting of galvanic layers and, hence, defining one of the 
method steps of the claimed working method (see T 1931/14 and 
T 848/93). 
Analogously, in the case of a "method of manufacture", i.e. a claim directed 
to a method for manufacturing a product, the fact that the method results in 
the product is to be treated as an integral method step (see T 268/13). 
On the other hand, where the purpose merely states a technical effect 
which inevitably arises when carrying out the other remaining steps of the 
claimed method and is thus inherent in those steps, this technical effect has 
no limiting effect on the subject-matter of the claim. For example, a method 
claim concerning the application of a particular surface active agent to a 
specified absorbent product and defining its purpose as "for reducing 
malodor" in terms of an intended technical effect is anticipated by a prior-art 
document describing a method having such suitability "for reducing 
malodor" although not mentioning the specific use (see T 1931/14 and 
T 304/08). 
4.14 Definition by reference to (use with) another entity 
A claim in respect of a physical entity (product, apparatus) may seek to 
define the invention by reference to features relating to another entity that is 
not part of the claimed first entity but that is related to it through use. An 
example of such a claim is "a cylinder head for an engine", where the 
former is defined by features of its location in the latter. 
Since the first entity (the cylinder head) can often be produced and 
marketed independently of the other entity (the engine), the applicant is 
normally entitled to independent protection of the first entity per se. 
Therefore, in first instance, such a claim is always interpreted as not 
including the other entity or its features: these limit the subject-matter of the 
claim only in so far as the first entity's features are suitable to be used with 
the second entity's features. In the above example, the cylinder head must 
be suitable to be mounted in the engine described in the claim, but the 
features of the engine do not limit the subject-matter of the claim per se. 
Only if the claim is directed without any doubt to a combination of the first 
and second entities, the features of the other entity are limiting for the 
subject-matter of the claim. In the above example, the claim should be 
written as an "engine with a cylinder head" or an "engine comprising a 
cylinder head" for the features of the engine to be considered as limiting the 
subject-matter of the claim. 
For the assessment of claims directed to computer-implemented 
inventions, where a claim to a computer program refers to a computer (a 
separate entity), see F-IV, 3.9. 
4.14.1 Clarity objections 
Once it has been established if a claim is directed to either one entity or to 
a combination of entities, the wording of the claim must be adapted 
appropriately to reflect it; otherwise the claim is objected to under Art. 84. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-33 
 
For example, in the case of a claim directed to a single entity, the first entity 
is "connectable" to the second entity; in the case of a claim directed to a 
combination of entities the first entity is "connected" to the second entity. 
4.14.2 Dimensions and/or shape defined by reference to another 
entity 
It may be allowable to define the dimensions and/or shape of a first entity in 
an independent claim by general reference to the dimensions and/or 
corresponding shape of a second entity which is not part of the claimed first 
entity but is related to it through use. This particularly applies where the 
size of the second entity is in some way standardised (for example, in the 
case of a mounting bracket for a vehicle number-plate, where the bracket 
frame and fixing elements are defined in relation to the outer shape of the 
number-plate). 
Furthermore, references to second entities which cannot be seen as 
subject to standardisation may also be sufficiently clear in cases where the 
skilled person would have little difficulty in inferring the resultant restriction 
of the scope of protection for the first entity (for example, in the case of a 
covering sheet for an agricultural round bale, where the length and breadth 
of the covering sheet and how it is folded are defined by reference to the 
bale's circumference, width and diameter, see T 455/92). It is neither 
necessary for such claims to contain the exact dimensions of the second 
entity, nor do they have to refer to a combination of the first and second 
entities. Specifying the length, width and/or height of the first entity without 
reference to the second would lead to an unwarranted restriction of the 
scope of protection. 
4.15 The expression "in" 
To avoid ambiguity, particular care is exercised when assessing claims 
which employ the word "in" to define a relationship between different 
physical entities (product, apparatus), or between entities and activities 
(process, use), or between different activities. Examples of claims worded 
in this way include the following: 
(i) 
Cylinder head in a four-stroke engine; 
(ii) 
In a telephone apparatus with an automatic dialler, dial tone detector 
and feature controller, the dial tone detector comprising ...; 
(iii) 
In a process using an electrode feeding means of an arc-welding 
apparatus, a method for controlling the arc welding current and 
voltage comprising the following steps: ...; and 
(iv) 
In a process/system/apparatus etc. ... the improvement consisting 
of... 
In examples (i) to (iii) the emphasis is on the fully functioning sub-units 
(cylinder head, dial tone detector, method for controlling the arc welding 
current and voltage) rather than the complete unit within which the sub-unit 
is contained (four-stroke engine, telephone, process). This can make it 
unclear whether the protection sought is limited to the sub-unit per se, or 
Part F – Chapter IV-34 

 
 
whether the unit as a whole is to be protected. For the sake of clarity, 
claims of this kind must be directed either to "a unit with (or comprising) a 
sub-unit" (e.g. "four-stroke engine with a cylinder head"), or to the sub-unit 
per se, specifying its purpose (for example, "cylinder head for a four-stroke 
engine"). The latter course may be followed only at the applicant's express 
wish and only if there is a basis for it in the application as filed, in 
accordance with Art. 123(2). 
With claims of the type indicated by example (iv), the use of the word "in" 
sometimes makes it unclear whether protection is sought for the 
improvement only or for all the features defined in the claim. Here, too, it is 
essential to ensure that the wording is clear. 
However, claims such as "use of a substance ... as an anticorrosive 
ingredient in a paint or lacquer composition" are acceptable on the basis of 
second non-medical use (see G-VI, 6.2). 
4.16 Use claims 
For the purposes of examination, a "use" claim in a form such as "the use 
of substance X as an insecticide" is regarded as equivalent to a "process" 
claim of the form "a process of killing insects using substance X". Thus, a 
claim in the form indicated is not to be interpreted as directed to the 
substance X recognisable (e.g. by further additives) as intended for use as 
an insecticide. Similarly, a claim for "the use of a transistor in an amplifying 
circuit" is equivalent to a process claim for the process of amplifying using a 
circuit containing the transistor and is not to be interpreted as being 
directed to "an amplifying circuit in which the transistor is used", nor to "the 
process of using the transistor in building such a circuit". However, a claim 
directed to the use of a process for a particular purpose is equivalent to a 
claim directed to that very same process (see T 684/02). 
Care is to be taken when a claim relates to a two-step process which 
combines a use step with a product production step. This may be the case 
e.g. when a polypeptide and its use in a screening method have been 
defined as the only contribution to the art. An example of such a claim 
would then be: 
"A method comprising: 
(a) 
contacting polypeptide X with a compound to be screened and 
(b) 
determining whether the compound affects the activity of said 
polypeptide, and subsequently transforming any active compound 
into a pharmaceutical composition." 
Many variations of such a claim are conceivable, but in essence they 
combine (a) a screening step (i.e. using a specified test material to select a 
compound having a given property) with (b) further production steps 
(i.e. further transforming the selected compound for instance into the 
desired composition). 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-35 
 
According to decision G 2/88 there are two different types of process claim, 
(i) the use of an entity to achieve a technical effect and (ii) a process for the 
production of a product. G 2/88 makes clear that Art. 64(2) applies only to 
processes of type (ii). The above claim and its analogues thus represent a 
combination of two different and irreconcilable types of process claim. 
Step (a) of the claim relates to a process of type (i), step (b) to a process of 
type (ii). Step (b) builds on the "effect" achieved by step (a), rather than 
step (a) feeding into step (b) a specific starting material and resulting in a 
specific product. Thus, the claim is made up partly of a use claim and partly 
of a process for producing a product. This renders the claim unclear 
according to Art. 84. 
4.17 References to the description or drawings 
As indicated in Rule 43(6), the claims must not, in respect of the technical 
features of the invention, rely on references to the description or drawings 
"except where absolutely necessary". In particular they must not normally 
rely on such references as "as described in part ... of the description", or 
"as illustrated in Figure 2 of the drawings". 
The emphatic wording of the excepting clause is to be noted. The onus is 
upon the applicant to show that it is "absolutely necessary" to rely on 
reference 
to 
the 
description 
or 
drawings 
in 
appropriate 
cases 
(see T 150/82). 
An example of an allowable exception is an invention involving some 
peculiar shape, illustrated in the drawings, but which cannot be readily 
defined either in words or by a simple mathematical formula. Another 
special case is that in which the invention relates to chemical products 
some of whose features can be defined only by means of graphs or 
diagrams. 
4.18 Reference signs 
If the application contains drawings, and the comprehension of the claims is 
improved by establishing the connection between the features mentioned in 
the claims and the corresponding reference signs in the drawings, then 
appropriate reference signs need to be placed in parentheses after the 
features mentioned in the claims. If there are a large number of different 
embodiments, only the reference signs of the most important embodiments 
need be incorporated in the independent claim(s). Where claims are drafted 
in the two-part form set out in Rule 43(1), the reference signs need to be 
inserted not only in the characterising part but also in the preamble of the 
claims. 
Reference signs are not however to be construed as limiting the extent of 
the matter protected by the claims; their sole function is to make claims 
easier to understand. A comment to that effect in the description is 
acceptable (see T 237/84). 
If text is added to reference signs in parentheses in the claims, lack of 
clarity can arise (Art. 84). Expressions such as "securing means (screw 13, 
nail 14)" or "valve assembly (valve seat 23, valve element 27, valve 
seat 28)" are not reference signs within the meaning of Rule 43(7) but are 
Rule 43(6) 
Rule 43(7) 
Part F – Chapter IV-36 

 
 
special features, to which the last sentence of Rule 43(7) is not applicable. 
Consequently, it is unclear whether the features added to the reference 
signs are limiting or not. Accordingly, such bracketed features are generally 
not permissible. However, additional references to those figures where 
particular reference signs are to be found, such as "(13 – Figure 3; 14 –
 Figure 4)" are unobjectionable. 
A lack of clarity can also arise with bracketed expressions that do not 
include reference signs, e.g. the expression "(concrete) moulded brick" is 
unclear because it cannot be determined if the feature moulded brick is 
limited or not by the word concrete. In contrast, bracketed expressions with 
a generally accepted meaning are allowable, e.g. "(meth)acrylate" which is 
known as an abbreviation for "acrylate and methacrylate". The use of 
brackets in chemical or mathematical formulae is also unobjectionable, as 
is their use when correcting physical values not complying with the 
requirements as determined by the President under Rule 49(2). 
4.19 Negative limitations (e.g. disclaimers) 
A claim's subject-matter is normally defined in terms of positive features 
indicating that certain technical elements are present. Exceptionally, 
however, the subject-matter may be restricted using a negative limitation 
expressly stating that particular features are absent. This may be done 
e.g. if the absence of a feature can be deduced from the application as filed 
(see T 278/88). 
Negative limitations such as disclaimers may be used only if adding 
positive features to the claim either would not define more clearly and 
concisely the subject-matter still protectable (see G 1/03 and T 4/80) or 
would unduly limit the scope of the claim (see T 1050/93). It has to be clear 
what is excluded by means of the disclaimer (see T 286/06). A claim 
containing one or more disclaimers must also fully comply with the clarity 
and conciseness requirements of Art. 84 (see G 1/03, Reasons 3). 
Moreover, in the interests of the patent's transparency, the excluded prior 
art needs to be indicated in the description in accordance with 
Rule 42(1)(b), and the relation between the prior art and the disclaimer 
needs to be shown. 
For the allowability of disclaimers excluding embodiments that were 
disclosed in the original application as being part of the invention, see 
H-V, 4.2.2. With respect to the allowability of disclaimers not disclosed in 
the application as originally filed (so-called undisclosed disclaimers), 
see H-V, 4.2.1. 
4.20 "Comprising" vs. "consisting of" 
This section outlines how the terms "comprising" and "consisting of" are to 
be interpreted when construing a claim.  
A claim directed to an apparatus/method/product "comprising" certain 
features is interpreted as meaning that it includes those features, but that it 
does not exclude the presence of other features, as long as they do not 
render the claim unworkable. 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-37 
 
On the other hand, if the wording "consist of" is used, then no further 
features are present in the apparatus/method/product apart from the ones 
following said wording. In particular, if a claim for a chemical compound 
refers to it as "consisting of components A, B and C" by their proportions 
expressed in percentages, the presence of any additional component is 
excluded and therefore the percentages must add up to 100% 
(see T 711/90). 
In the case of chemical compounds or compositions, the use of "consisting 
essentially of" or "comprising substantially" means that specific further 
components can be present, namely those not materially affecting the 
essential characteristics of the compound or composition. For any other 
apparatus/method/product these terms have the same meaning as 
"comprising". 
Regarding Art. 123(2), "comprising" does not provide per se an implicit 
basis for either "consisting of" or "consisting essentially of" (T 759/10). 
4.21 Functional definition of a pathological condition 
When a claim is directed to a further therapeutic application of a 
medicament and the condition to be treated is defined in functional terms, 
e.g. "any condition susceptible of being improved or prevented by selective 
occupation of a specific receptor", the claim can be regarded as clear only if 
instructions, in the form of experimental tests or testable criteria, are 
available from the patent documents or from the common general 
knowledge allowing the skilled person to recognise which conditions fall 
within the functional definition and accordingly within the scope of the claim 
(see T 241/95; see also G-II, 4.2). 
4.22 Broad claims 
The Convention does not explicitly mention overly broad claims. However, 
objections to such claims may arise for various reasons. 
Where there are discrepancies between the claims and the description, the 
claims are not sufficiently supported by the description (Art. 84) and also, in 
most cases, the invention is not sufficiently disclosed (Art. 83) 
(see T 409/91, F-IV, 6.1 and F-IV, 6.4). 
Sometimes an objection of lack of novelty arises, for example if the claim is 
formulated in such broad terms that it also covers known subject-matter 
from other technical fields. Broad claims may also cover embodiments for 
which a purported effect has not been achieved. On raising an objection of 
lack of inventive step in such cases, see G-VII, 5.2. 
For broad claims in opposition proceedings, see also D-V, 4 and 5. 
4.23 Order of claims 
There is no legal requirement that the first claim must be the broadest. 
However, Art. 84 requires that the claims must be clear not only individually 
but also as a whole. Therefore, where there are a large number of claims, 
they need to be arranged with the broadest claim first. If the broadest of a 
large number of claims is a long way down, so that it could easily be 
Art. 84 and Art. 83 
Art. 54 and Art. 56 
Part F – Chapter IV-38 

 
 
overlooked, the applicant is required either to rearrange the claims in a 
more logical way or to direct attention to the broadest claim in the 
introductory part or in the summary of the description. 
Furthermore, if the broadest claim is not the first one, the later broader 
claim must also be an independent claim. Consequently, where these 
independent claims are of the same category, an objection may also arise 
under Rule 43(2) (see F-IV, 3.2 and 3.3). 
4.24 Interpretation of terms such as identity and similarity in relation 
to amino or nucleic acid sequences 
Amino acid or nucleic acid sequences can be defined by a percentage of 
identity. The percentage of identity determines the number of identical 
residues over a defined length in a given alignment. If no algorithm or 
calculation method for determining the percentage of identity is defined, the 
broadest interpretation will be applied using any reasonable algorithm or 
calculation method known at the relevant filing date. 
Amino acid sequences can be defined by a degree of similarity (expressed 
as a percentage of similarity). The term similarity is broader than the term 
identity because it allows conservative substitutions of amino acid residues 
having similar physicochemical properties over a defined length of a given 
alignment. The percentage of similarity is determinable only if a 
similarity-scoring matrix is defined. If no similarity-scoring matrix is defined, 
a claim referring to a sequence displaying a percentage of similarity to a 
recited sequence is considered to cover any sequence fulfilling the 
similarity requirement as determined with any reasonable similarity-scoring 
matrix known at the relevant filing date. 
For amino acid sequences, if a percentage of homology is used by the 
applicant as the only feature to distinguish the subject-matter of a claim 
from the prior art, its use is objected to under Art. 84 (cf. F-IV, 4.6.1) unless 
the determination or calculation of the percentage of homology is clearly 
defined in the application as filed. For nucleic acid sequences, homology 
percentage and identity percentage are usually considered to have the 
same meaning. 
5. 
Conciseness, number of claims 
The requirement that the claims must be concise refers to the claims in 
their entirety as well as to the individual claims. The number of claims must 
be considered in relation to the nature of the invention the applicant seeks 
to protect. Undue repetition of wording, e.g. between one claim and 
another, is to be avoided by the use of the dependent form. Regarding 
independent claims in the same category, see F-IV, 3.2 and 3.3. The 
conciseness requirement also applies to dependent claims in respect of 
both their number and their content. For example, the repetition of 
subject-matter that has already been claimed is unnecessary and 
negatively affects the conciseness of the claims. Similarly, the number of 
dependent claims should be reasonable. What is or what is not a 
reasonable number of claims depends on the facts and circumstances of 
each particular case. The interests of the relevant public must also be 
borne in mind. The presentation of the claims must not make it unduly 
Art. 84 
Rule 43(5) 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-39 
 
burdensome to determine the matter for which protection is sought (T 79/91 
and T 246/91). Objection may also arise where there is a multiplicity of 
alternatives within a single claim, if this renders it unduly burdensome to 
determine the matter for which protection is sought. 
Where it is found that the claims lack conciseness under Art. 84, this may 
lead to the issuing of a partial European or partial supplementary European 
search report under Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 and 3.2). In such cases, in the 
absence of appropriate amendment and/or convincing arguments from the 
applicant as to why the invitation under Rule 63(1) was not justified, an 
objection under Rule 63(3) will also arise (see H-II, 5). 
6. Support in description 
6.1 General remarks 
The claims must be supported by the description. This means that there 
must be a basis in the description for the subject-matter of every claim and 
that the scope of the claims must not be broader than is justified by the 
extent of the description and drawings and also the contribution to the art 
(see T 409/91). Regarding the support of dependent claims by the 
description, see F-IV, 6.6. 
6.2 Extent of generalisation 
Most claims are generalisations from one or more particular examples. The 
extent of generalisation permissible is a matter which the division must 
judge in each particular case in the light of the relevant prior art. Thus an 
invention which opens up a whole new field is entitled to more generality in 
the claims than one which is concerned with advances in a known 
technology. A fair statement of claim is one which is not so broad that it 
goes beyond the invention nor yet so narrow as to deprive the applicant of 
a just reward for the disclosure of his invention. The applicants are allowed 
to cover all obvious modifications of, equivalents to and uses of that which 
they have described. In particular, if it is reasonable to predict that all the 
variants covered by the claims have the properties or uses the applicants 
ascribe to them in the description, they are allowed to draw the claims 
accordingly. After the date of filing, however, the applicants are allowed to 
do so only if this does not contravene Art. 123(2). 
6.3 Objection of lack of support 
As a general rule, a claim is regarded as supported by the description 
unless there are well-founded reasons for believing that the skilled person 
would be unable, on the basis of the information given in the application as 
filed, to extend the particular teaching of the description to the whole of the 
field claimed by using routine methods of experimentation or analysis. 
Support must, however, be of a technical character; vague statements or 
assertions having no technical content provide no basis. 
The division raises an objection of lack of support only if it has well-founded 
reasons. Once the division has set out a reasoned case that, for example, a 
broad claim is not supported over the whole of its breadth, the onus of 
demonstrating that the claim is fully supported lies with the applicant 
Art. 84 
Part F – Chapter IV-40 

 
 
(see F-IV, 4). Where an objection is raised, the reasons are, where 
possible, to be supported specifically by a published document. 
A claim in generic form, i.e. relating to a whole class, e.g. of materials or 
machines, may be acceptable even if of broad scope, if there is fair support 
in the description and there is no reason to suppose that the invention 
cannot be worked through the whole of the field claimed. Where the 
information given appears insufficient to enable a person skilled in the art to 
extend the teaching of the description to parts of the field claimed but not 
explicitly described by using routine methods of experimentation or 
analysis, the division raises a reasoned objection, and invites the applicant 
to establish, by suitable response, that the invention can in fact be readily 
applied on the basis of the information given over the whole field claimed 
or, failing this, to restrict the claim accordingly. 
The question of support is illustrated by the following examples: 
(i) 
a claim relates to a process for treating all kinds of "plant seedlings" 
by subjecting them to a controlled cold shock so as to produce 
specified results, whereas the description discloses the process 
applied to one kind of plant only. Since it is well-known that plants 
vary widely in their properties, there are well-founded reasons for 
believing that the process is not applicable to all plant seedlings. 
Unless the applicants can provide convincing evidence that the 
process is nevertheless generally applicable, they must restrict their 
claim to the particular kind of plant referred to in the description. A 
mere assertion that the process is applicable to all plant seedlings is 
not sufficient; 
(ii) 
a claim relates to a specified method of treating "synthetic resin 
mouldings" to obtain certain changes in physical characteristics. All 
the examples described relate to thermoplastic resins and the 
method is such as to appear inappropriate to thermosetting resins. 
Unless the applicants can provide evidence that the method is 
nevertheless applicable to thermosetting resins, they must restrict 
their claim to thermoplastic resins; 
(iii) 
a claim relates to improved fuel oil compositions which have a given 
desired property. The description provides support for one way of 
obtaining fuel oils having this property, which is by the presence of 
defined amounts of a certain additive. No other ways of obtaining fuel 
oils having the desired property are disclosed. The claim makes no 
mention of the additive. The claim is not supported over the whole of 
its breadth and objection arises. 
Where it is found that the claims lack support in the description under 
Art. 84, this may lead to the issuing of a partial European or supplementary 
European search report under Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 and 3.2). In such 
cases, in the absence of appropriate amendment and/or convincing 
arguments provided by the applicant in his response to the invitation under 
Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3.2) or to the search opinion under Rule 70a 
(see B-XI, 8), an objection under Rule 63(3) will also arise (see H-II, 5). 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-41 
 
6.4 Lack of support vs. insufficient disclosure 
Although an objection of lack of support is an objection under Art. 84, it can 
often, as in the above examples, also be considered as an objection of 
insufficient disclosure of the invention under Art. 83 (see F-III, 1 to 3), the 
objection being that the disclosure is insufficient to enable the skilled 
person to carry out the "invention" over the whole of the broad field claimed 
(although sufficient in respect of a narrow "invention"). Both requirements 
are designed to reflect the principle that the terms of a claim must be 
commensurate with, or be justified by, the invention's technical contribution 
to the art. Therefore, the extent to which an invention is sufficiently 
disclosed is also highly relevant to the issue of support. The reasons for 
failure to meet the requirements of Art. 83 may in effect be the same as 
those that lead to the infringement of Art. 84 as well, namely that the 
invention, 
over 
the whole 
range 
claimed, 
extends to technical 
subject-matter not made available to the person skilled in the art by the 
application as filed (see T 409/91, Reasons 2 and 3.3 to 3.5). 
For example, where a technical feature is described and highlighted in the 
description as being an essential feature of the invention, to comply with 
Art. 84 this feature must also be part of the independent claim(s) defining 
the invention (see F-IV, 4.5.1). By the same token, if the (essential) 
technical feature in question is absent from the claims, and no information 
is given on how to perform the claimed invention successfully without the 
use of said feature, the description does not disclose the invention defined 
in the claim(s) in the manner prescribed by Art. 83. 
An objection under both Art. 84 and Art. 83 may also be justified. An 
example would be a claim relating to a known class of chemical 
compounds defined by measurable parameters, when the description does 
not disclose a technical teaching allowing the skilled person to manufacture 
those compounds complying with the parametric definition, and this is not 
otherwise feasible by the application of common general knowledge or 
routine experimentation. Such a claim would be both technically not 
supported and not sufficiently disclosed, regardless of whether the 
parametric definition meets the clarity requirement of Art. 84. 
Whether the objection is raised as lack of support or as insufficiency is not 
important in examination proceedings; but it is important in opposition 
proceedings since there only the latter ground is available (see D-III, 5). 
6.5 Definition in terms of function 
A claim may broadly define a feature in terms of its function, i.e. as a 
functional feature, even where only one example of the feature has been 
given in the description, if the skilled person would appreciate that other 
means could be used for the same function (see also F-IV, 2.1 and 4.10). 
For example, "terminal position detecting means" in a claim might be 
supported by a single example comprising a limit switch, it being evident to 
the skilled person that e.g. a photoelectric cell or a strain gauge could be 
used instead. In general, however, if the entire contents of the application 
are such as to convey the impression that a function is to be carried out in a 
particular way, with no intimation that alternative means are envisaged, and 
a claim is formulated in such a way as to embrace other means, or all 
Art. 83 
Art. 84 
Part F – Chapter IV-42 

 
 
means, of performing the function, then objection arises. Furthermore, it 
may not be sufficient if the description merely states in vague terms that 
other means may be adopted, if it is not reasonably clear what they might 
be or how they might be used. 
6.6 Support for dependent claims 
Where certain subject-matter is clearly disclosed in a claim of the 
application as filed, but is not mentioned anywhere in the description, it is 
permissible to amend the description so that it includes this subject-matter. 
Where the claim is dependent, it may suffice if it is mentioned in the 
description that the claim sets out a particular embodiment of the invention 
(see F-II, 4.5). 
 

Part F – Chapter IV-43 
 
Annex 
Examples concerning essential features 
Example 1 
Claim 1 relates to a method for storing gel-coated seeds having a gel coat 
comprising an aqueous gel having been made water-insoluble by a metal 
ion. The method is characterised by storing the gel-coated seeds in an 
aqueous solution containing said metal ion. In the description the object of 
the invention is defined as providing a method for storing gel-coated seeds 
easily without causing reduction in yield and handling properties. It was 
emphasised in the description that it is necessary to confine the metal ion 
concentration to a specific range in order to achieve the goals of the 
invention. A metal ion concentration outside the specific range was 
presented as negatively influencing yield and handling properties. The 
subject-matter of claim 1 – which does not indicate the specific range – 
therefore does not solve the problem stated in the description. 
Example 2 
The invention relates to an apparatus for concave shaping of a metal strip. 
In the closest prior art, the metal strip is passed transversely to its length 
through a shaping set of rollers at which the concave shape is applied to 
the strip. According to the description, the problem is that the rollers are 
unable to subject the lateral ends of the strip to a curve-creating force and 
so the lateral ends normally end up planar. The distinguishing feature of the 
independent claim specifies that a flexible belt or web-like member is 
provided to support the strip in its passage through the shaping set of 
rollers. This feature is sufficient to solve the problem. Further features, 
e.g. the details of the mechanism for advancing the strip into the shaping 
set of rollers or the provision of at least three rollers, are not necessary to 
solve the problem: such additional features would unduly restrict the claim 
(see T 1069/01). 
Example 3 
Claim 1 is directed to an apparatus for coding television signals comprising, 
amongst other features, a parameter generating means which ensures that 
the error between the pixel data of the predicted and actual current fields is 
minimised. The description describes only one example for minimising the 
error, namely a method of least squares. What is important is that the 
skilled person would be able to realise how the error minimising function 
can be implemented: it is not relevant in this context whether the method of 
least squares is the only method applicable. It is therefore not necessary to 
further restrict the claimed parameter generating means in the sense that it 
uses a method of least squares (see T 41/91). 
Example 4 
The description states that a compound C is obtained by reacting a mixture 
of A and B for at least 10 minutes at 100°C. It is emphasised that A and B 
must be reacted for this minimum amount of time, as otherwise the reaction 
will be incomplete and C will not be formed. Claim 1 is directed to a process 
Part F – Chapter IV-44 

 
 
for the production of compound C, characterised by reacting a mixture of A 
and B for 5 to 15 minutes at 100°C. The claim does not contain all the 
essential features of the invention, as the description clearly states that for 
the reaction to be complete, it is necessary to react A and B for at least 
10 minutes. 
Example 5 
The description identifies the problem to be solved as providing aerosol 
compositions wherein the percentage of undesirable volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs) required as propellant is dramatically decreased, 
resulting in less VOC release to the atmosphere. Claim 1 specifies the 
minimum amount of at least 15 weight% of propellant (which is a VOC) in 
the aerosol, but is completely silent about any maximum amount thereof. 
The problem underlying the application of releasing less VOCs into the 
environment is solved only when the propellant does not exceed a 
particular maximum amount in the aerosol composition: this maximum 
value is therefore an essential feature of the invention. Claim 1 covers 
aerosols comprising any amount of propellant greater than or equal to 
15 weight%, thereby covering the deficient high percentage of propellant 
present in conventional aerosols. The percentage of undesirable VOCs in 
the claimed aerosol compositions is therefore not "dramatically decreased", 
and so the stated aim of the present invention is not achieved (see 
T 586/97). 
Example 6 
As regards diagnostic methods, in G 1/04 it is indicated that if the deductive 
medical or veterinary decision phase is unambiguously derivable from the 
application or patent as a whole, it is to be included as an essential feature 
in the independent claim. In other words, if the inevitable outcome of the 
first three phases of such a method (see G-II, 4.2.1.3) is a specific 
diagnosis for curative purposes allowing the deviation to be attributed to a 
particular clinical picture, the decision phase must be included in the 
independent claim in order to fulfil the requirements of Art. 84. However, 
this may cause a claim to be excluded from patentability under Art. 53(c) 
(see also G-II, 4.2.1.3). The requirement that the final decision phase be 
included in the independent claim as an essential feature is to be applied 
only if it is clear from the application/patent as a whole that the inevitable 
result of the findings leads unambiguously to a particular diagnosis: this will 
have to be decided by the division on a case-by-case basis. 
 

Part F – Chapter V-1 
 
Chapter V – Unity of invention 
1. Introduction 
The basic principle behind the requirement of unity is that a patent is 
granted for each invention separately, i.e. in order to proceed to grant, a 
European patent application is required to contain claims relating to one 
invention only (G 2/92, Reasons 2). 
This requirement of unity is further justified by the principle of equal 
treatment of applicants: any applicant is entitled to the same rendered 
service against the paid fees, i.e. one search/examination against one 
search/examination fee. 
Therefore at the search stage, if an application as filed is considered by the 
search division to relate to more than one invention, a search fee may be 
paid for each such invention, and the search report will be drawn up only in 
respect of inventions for which search fees have been paid. At the 
examination stage the applicant can select only one searched invention in 
each application to be examined for conformity with the patentability and 
other requirements of the EPC (see G 2/92, Reasons 2). 
Art. 82 and Rule 44 govern the application of the requirement of unity to 
European patent applications. This requirement is not applicable in 
opposition proceedings (G 1/91). 
This chapter deals with the substantive aspects of the assessment of unity 
of invention (F-V, 2 and F-V, 3), as well as some procedural aspects 
relating to lack of unity during search (F-V, 4) and lack of unity during 
substantive examination (F-V, 5). Aspects of unity of invention in the case 
of amended claims and Euro-PCT applications are dealt with in F-V, 6 and 
F-V, 7 
respectively. 
Further 
aspects 
related 
to 
the 
procedural 
implementation of unity of invention in search and examination are to be 
found in chapters B-VII and C-III respectively. 
Given the harmonisation of the definitions concerning unity of invention in 
Rules 13(1) PCT and Rule 13(2) PCT versus Art. 82 and Rule 44(1) 
respectively, the criteria for unity in both systems are the same. Hence, 
unity of invention is examined in search and substantive examination in 
both European and PCT procedures according to the same principles. This 
does not apply to the respective procedures themselves, where significant 
differences exist. 
Consequently, decisions of the boards of appeal rendered according to the 
former PCT protest procedures continue to be of interest for the 
consideration of unity in European applications. 
2. Requirement of unity of invention 
A European patent application must relate to one invention only or relate to 
a group of inventions which must be so linked as to form a single general 
inventive concept (see also B-VII, 1). 
Rule 64 
Art. 150(2) 
Art. 82 
Part F – Chapter V-2 

 
 
The requirement of unity of invention needs to be assessed only if a group 
of inventions is claimed. A group of inventions may be formed, for example, 
by a plurality of independent claims in the same or in different categories, a 
plurality of alternative inventions defined within a single independent claim 
(see also F-IV, 3.7) or a plurality of dependent claims where the 
independent claim is either not novel or not inventive. 
If a group of inventions is claimed, the requirement that the inventions in 
this group are so linked as to form a single general concept (Art. 82) is 
fulfilled only if there is a technical relationship among the claimed 
inventions involving one or more of the same or corresponding special 
technical features. 
The term "special" means that the features in question define the 
contribution that the invention considered as a whole makes over the "prior 
art at hand" in terms of novelty and inventive step. The "prior art at hand", 
i.e. the prior art relied upon in the non-unity assessment, may vary 
depending on the stage of proceedings (see F-V, 3). 
The term "same" means that the special technical features are identical or 
define an identical chemical structure. 
The term "corresponding" means that the special technical features achieve 
the same technical effect or solve the same technical problem. 
Correspondence may be found for example in alternative solutions, or 
interrelated features, e.g. the interaction between a plug and a socket 
causing a releasable electrical connection, or in a causal relationship such 
as a step in a manufacturing process that causes a certain structural 
feature in a product. For example, an application might include two sets of 
claims, one comprising a metal spring, and another comprising a block of 
rubber. The metal spring and block of rubber may be considered to be 
corresponding technical features as they both achieve the same technical 
effect of resilience. 
In contrast, features that are not shared, i.e. features that only appear in 
some but not in other claims, cannot be part of the single general inventive 
concept. 
2.1 Insufficient grounds for lack of unity 
When determining unity of invention, a finding of lack of clarity of the claims 
is on its own not sufficient grounds for a finding of lack of unity. 
Normally, too, the sequence of the claims has no impact on the 
determination of unity of invention. However, it will have an impact on which 
invention is to be considered the first invention mentioned in the claims 
(see F-V, 3.4). 
Moreover, the fact that the claimed separate inventions belong to different 
groups of the classification is not in itself a reason for a finding of lack of 
unity. 
Rule 44(1) 
Art. 84 
 

Part F – Chapter V-3 
 
If an application contains claims of different categories or several 
independent claims of the same category, this is not in itself a reason for an 
objection of lack of unity of invention (the relationship between Rule 43(2) 
and Art. 82 is explained in more detail in F-V, 3.2.1). 
Lack of unity does not arise because of one claim containing a number of 
individual features, where these features do not present a technical 
interrelationship 
(i.e. 
a 
combination), 
but 
merely 
a 
juxtaposition 
(see G-VII, 7). 
By definition, no lack of unity can be present between an independent claim 
and its dependent claims, even if the features of the dependent claims are 
juxtaposed with the features of the independent claim (see F-V, 3.2.3). 
2.2 Division's approach 
Lack of unity is not a ground of revocation in later proceedings. Therefore, 
although the objection is certainly made and amendment insisted upon in 
clear cases, it is neither raised nor insisted upon on the basis of a narrow, 
literal or academic approach. This is particularly so during search when the 
possible lack of unity does not necessitate a further search. 
When a lack of unity is established, the claimed subject-matter is divided 
into separate inventions and/or inventions grouped together in view of their 
technical relationships (see F-V, 3.2), i.e. according to any common matter 
comprising same or corresponding potential special technical features. In 
this context, an invention must have technical character and be concerned 
with a technical problem within the meaning of Art. 52(1) (see G-I, 1), but it 
does not necessarily need to meet other requirements for patentability, 
such as novelty and inventive step (see G-VI and G-VII). 
Lack of unity may be evident a priori, i.e. prior to carrying out a prior-art 
search, or may become apparent a posteriori, i.e. after taking into account 
the prior art revealed by the search in terms of novelty and inventive step. 
3. Assessment of unity 
The assessment of unity of invention serves to determine if the 
subject-matter of the claims have anything in common that represents a 
single general inventive concept (Art. 82). If any of the claims contain one 
or more alternatives, each of the alternatives is considered as if it were a 
separate claim for the purpose of assessing lack of unity. 
A substantive assessment of unity of invention requires 
(i) 
determining, in the light of the application as a whole, the common 
matter, if any, between the claims of the different claimed inventions 
that the examiner provisionally identifies (see F-V, 2.2, 3.2 and 3.4); 
(ii) 
comparing the common matter with the "prior art at hand" to examine 
whether the common matter makes a contribution over that prior art, 
namely whether it comprises "special" technical features within the 
meaning of Rule 44(1); 
Rule 43(2) 
Part F – Chapter V-4 

 
 
(iii) 
if the common matter does not comprise special technical features, 
analysing any remaining technical features which are not part of the 
identified common matter to determine if there is a unifying technical 
relationship among some of the claims. 
For example, lack of unity may arise among the dependent claims if the 
independent claim upon which they depend does not comprise any features 
making a technical contribution over the prior art at hand. In such a case, 
the independent claim would not provide a unifying technical relationship 
among the dependent claims as required by Rule 44(1) as it would not 
contain any "special technical features". 
(i) 
Determining the common matter 
Common matter represents a potential single general inventive concept 
among the claims. It may be present in features which are the same or 
corresponding (see F-V, 2), namely in features that are either identical to 
each other or that provide alone or in combination a common technical 
effect or a solution to a common technical problem. 
The technical problem in the non-unity assessment may be different from 
that in a patentability assessment since the overall object is to find out what 
the claims have in common. 
When analysing the technical problem in a non-unity assessment, the 
starting point is usually what is considered by the applicant in the 
description as having been achieved. In this regard, the applicant must 
disclose the invention in such terms that the technical problem and its 
solution can be understood, and state any advantageous effects of the 
invention with reference to the background art (Rule 42(1)(c)). This 
technical problem defines in the first instance the common matter of the 
claims. 
However, for the purpose of considering unity of invention, the division is 
not restricted to the general concept of what the applicant subjectively 
claims to be his invention (G 1/89 and G 2/89). 
The technical problem put forward by the applicant in the description may, 
on closer examination, reveal itself as unsuitable as a means of linking the 
subject-matter of the claims in such a way that they form a single general 
inventive concept. This may happen either where, in view of the information 
contained in the description and the common general knowledge of the 
skilled person, it is evident that different claims solve different problems (a 
priori assessment of lack of unity) or where the search reveals prior art 
which discloses or renders obvious a solution of the unifying technical 
problem stated by the applicant in the description (a posteriori assessment 
of lack of unity). In the latter case, the technical problem stated by the 
applicant may no longer constitute the single general inventive concept 
required by Art. 82 since it cannot be regarded as inventive. 
For example, a prior-art document under Art. 54(2) disclosing all the 
features of an independent claim also discloses, at least implicitly, the 
 

Part F – Chapter V-5 
 
technical problem stated by the applicant since by definition this problem 
must be solved by the features of said independent claim. 
The division will then proceed to analyse if any other common matter is 
present among the claims, i.e. identify, in the light of the application as a 
whole, any technical features of the claims that are the same or 
corresponding. When 
determining 
whether 
technical features are 
corresponding, it is important that the technical problems solved, which are 
associated with the technical effects, are not formulated too narrowly or too 
generally. If the technical problems are too narrow when they could have 
been more general, they may have nothing in common leading to the 
possibly wrong conclusion that technical features are not corresponding. If 
they are too general when they could have been narrower, the common 
aspects of the problem may be known, also leading to the possibly wrong 
conclusion that there is a lack of unity. 
For example, a membrane and a diaphragm may achieve the technical 
effect of "providing resilience" and hence may be corresponding features. 
Common matter may not only be found in features of claims in the same 
category but may also be embodied in features of claims of different 
categories. For example, in the case of a product, a process specially 
adapted for the manufacture of said product and the use of said product, 
the product may represent the common matter which is present in the use 
and in the process as the effect or result of the process. 
Common matter may also be embodied in interrelated product features 
(e.g. a plug and a socket). Although corresponding features in interrelated 
products may be formulated quite differently, if in their interaction they 
contribute to the same technical effect or to the solution of the same 
technical problem, they may be part of the common matter. 
There may be cases where no common matter at all can be identified. Then 
the application lacks unity because neither a technical relationship within 
the meaning of Rule 44(1) is present between the independent claims, nor 
does the application entail a single general inventive concept within the 
meaning of Art. 82. 
(ii) 
Comparison of the common matter with the prior art at hand 
If common matter, namely subject-matter involving the same or 
corresponding technical features, is identified in the claims, it must be 
compared with the prior art at hand. If the common matter defines a 
non-obvious contribution over that prior art, it will involve "special technical 
features", and the inventions concerned will be so linked as to form a single 
general inventive concept. Otherwise, if the common matter is known or 
obvious from the prior art at hand, then the application lacks unity. This 
assessment is to be done on the basis of an assessment of novelty and 
inventive step vis-à-vis the prior art at hand. The obviousness is to be 
assessed, whenever appropriate, using the problem-solution approach. 
Part F – Chapter V-6 

 
 
The common matter may involve features defining technical alternatives. If 
the common technical effect to be achieved by these technical alternatives 
is already known, or may be recognised as generally desirable (a mere 
desideratum), or is obvious, these alternative features cannot be 
considered as defining a technical relationship within the meaning of Rule 
44(1) because there is no inventive merit in formulating the problem. 
The "prior art at hand", i.e. the prior art relied upon in the non-unity 
assessment, may vary depending on the stage of proceedings. For 
example, where the assessment is carried out before the search ("a priori 
assessment"), the only "prior art at hand" may be the background art 
provided by the applicant in the description and any common general 
knowledge. During the search, other prior art may be revealed and may 
form the basis for the "a posteriori assessment". Therefore, the "prior art at 
hand" may change during the course of the proceedings. For this reason 
the assessment of unity is iterative. 
(iii) 
Analysis of the remaining technical features 
If the comparison of the common matter under (ii) leads to the finding of a 
lack of unity, as a next step, the groups of different inventions present in the 
claims need to be confirmed or refined (see F-V, 3.2). 
In order to determine these groups of inventions, the remaining technical 
features not forming part of the identified common matter need to be 
analysed. In most cases, each group will comprise several claims. This 
grouping is performed on the basis of the technical problems associated 
with the remaining technical features of each of the claims. Those claims 
comprising remaining technical features associated with the same technical 
problem are combined into a single group. However, if the technical 
problem has been successfully solved in the prior art, claims associated 
with the same technical problem may be placed into different groups (see 
F-V, 3.3.1(iii)(c)). 
The technical problems associated with the claims must be formulated with 
care. It may not be sufficient to analyse the remaining technical features of 
each claim in isolation, but rather to analyse their effect when read in the 
context of the individual claim as a whole and in the light of the description. 
When formulating the technical problems of the various inventions in a unity 
assessment, a very narrow approach should be avoided since the aim of 
the exercise is to see whether any commonality may be established 
between the inventions. It is therefore often necessary to redefine the very 
specific problems associated with each of the claims to arrive at a more 
general problem, while bearing in mind the context in which the relevant 
features are disclosed. 
For the grouping, it is irrelevant whether or not the subject-matter of the 
claims or of the remaining technical features of the claims are novel or 
inventive over the prior art at hand. However, it is relevant for assessing 
whether or not the applicant is to be invited to pay an additional search fee 
for a group (see F-V, 4). 
 

Part F – Chapter V-7 
 
If the problem(s) associated with the different groups is (are) either known 
from the prior art at hand or is (are) different from each other, then the 
finding of step (ii) that there exists a lack of unity is confirmed. 
3.1 Non-unity and prior art 
3.1.1 Non-unity and prior art under Art. 54(3) 
Documents cited under Art. 54(3) should be disregarded in the evaluation 
of unity of invention since they cannot anticipate the inventive concept of 
the application under examination. 
3.1.2 Non-unity and prior art under Art. 54(2) 
Documents cited under Art. 54(2) as accidental anticipation should be 
disregarded in the evaluation of unity of invention since they cannot 
anticipate the inventive concept of the application under examination (see 
H-V, 4.2.1, G 1/03 and G 1/16). 
3.2 Grouping of inventions 
As a general rule, after the initial identification of subject-matter lacking 
unity, the claims and alternatives contained in claims are assigned to the 
identified groups of inventions. This step comprises the assessment of 
which of the remaining claims or alternatives in claims could potentially 
relate to the same technical problem. By doing so, groups of inventions are 
identified wherein each group of inventions relates to unitary subject-matter 
in view of the prior art at hand. If, in the course of grouping, the same 
special technical feature, which provides a contribution over the prior art, is 
identified in two groups of inventions, both groups of inventions need to be 
combined into one single group. Conversely, if, within one initial single 
group of inventions, claims or alternatives in claims are identified that are 
not linked by a potentially special technical feature, which provides a 
contribution over the prior art at hand, they will normally be separated into 
different groups of inventions. See also F-V, 3(iii) for analysing features in 
their context rather than in isolation. The initial grouping of claims and 
alternatives in claims into different inventions may require re-evaluation 
during the course of assessment of unity of invention. 
Typically, different groups of inventions are based on different independent 
claims of the same category, on alternatives defined in one independent 
claim (see F-V, 3.2.1) or on dependent claims defining alternative 
embodiments, provided that the independent claim is either not novel or not 
inventive. However, different groups of inventions may also be based on 
independent claims in different categories if lack of unity is present between 
these claims. 
3.2.1 Plurality of independent claims in the same category 
Rule 43(2) defines in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) the situations where, 
without prejudice to the requirements of Art. 82, an application is allowed to 
comprise a plurality of independent claims in the same category (see 
F-IV, 3.2 and 3.3). The express reference to Art. 82 in Rule 43(2) makes 
clear that the requirement for unity of invention must still be met. Where the 
application both lacks unity of invention and fails to comply with the 
Rule 43(2) 
Part F – Chapter V-8 

 
 
requirements of Rule 43(2), it is at the discretion of the division to raise an 
objection under Rule 43(2) or Art. 82, or both. 
A plurality of inventions in the same category may constitute a group of 
inventions so linked as to form a single general inventive concept. 
Examples of inventions in the same category are alternative forms of an 
invention or interrelated inventions. 
Alternative forms of an invention may be claimed either in a plurality of 
independent claims or in a single independent claim (see also F-IV, 3.7). In 
the latter case, the presence of the two alternatives as independent forms 
may not be immediately apparent. In either case, the same criteria are 
applied in deciding whether or not there is unity of invention, and lack of 
unity of invention may therefore also exist within a single claim. 
Several independent claims in the same category directed to interrelated 
subject-matter may meet the requirement of unity even if it appears that the 
claimed subject-matter is quite different, provided that technical features 
making a contribution over the prior art at hand are the same or 
corresponding. Examples of such situations include a transmitter and the 
corresponding receiver or a plug and the corresponding socket (see also 
F-IV, 3.2). 
Thus, special technical features relating to the single general inventive 
concept must be either implicitly or explicitly present in each of the 
independent claims. 
3.2.2 Plurality of independent claims in different categories 
A plurality of independent claims in different categories (see F-IV, 3.1) may 
constitute a group of inventions so linked as to form a single general 
inventive concept as defined in Rule 44(2). 
However, it is essential that a single general inventive concept link the 
claims in the various categories. The presence in each claim of expressions 
such as "specially adapted" or "specifically designed" does not necessarily 
imply that a single general inventive concept is present. 
3.2.3 Dependent claims 
A dependent claim and the higher-ranking claim on which it depends 
cannot be grouped into two different groups of inventions (see F-V, 2.1). 
If, however, the higher-ranking claim appears not to be patentable, then the 
question of whether there is still an inventive link between all the claims 
dependent on that higher-ranking claim needs to be carefully considered. 
In this context it is important to verify that a claim that is drafted as a 
dependent claim is in fact a true dependent claim comprising all the 
features of the corresponding independent claim, see F-IV 3.7. For a 
definition of a dependent claim, see F-IV, 3.4 and 3.8. 
Rule 44(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter V-9 
 
3.2.4 Common dependent claims 
While an independent claim is always part of the common matter among its 
dependent claims, the opposite is not true: a claim dependent on several 
independent claims is never part of the common matter between these 
independent claims. 
Unity is assessed firstly between the independent claims. If a dependent 
claim comprises technical features common to several inventions, then it is 
part of all of these inventions at the same time. 
Example 1  
An application contains two independent claims and one dependent claim: 
1. 
A device comprising feature A. 
2. 
A device comprising feature B. 
3. 
A device comprising features A and B. 
In this example, independent claims 1 and 2 are not linked by a single 
general inventive concept; features A and B are neither the same nor 
corresponding special technical features. A lack of unity is present between 
claims 1 and 2, each of them being directed to a different invention. The 
content of dependent claim 3 has no bearing on this analysis. 
If dependent claims comprise features of two or more groups of inventions, 
then they belong to each of these group of inventions. In example 1, the 
subject-matter of claim 3 contains features of each of the two inventions 
(claim 1, claim 2), thus belonging to both inventions at the same time. 
Therefore, the search for the first invention mentioned in the claims should, 
in this example, cover the subject-matter of claim 1 and claim 3.  
The examiner also assesses if a further search fee should be paid for the 
second invention (see F-V, 2.2, F-V, 3.4, B-VII, B-III, 3.8). 
Example 2 
An application comprises the following claims:  
1. 
A device comprising feature A.  
2. 
A device according to claim 1, further comprising feature B. 
3. 
A device according to any of the previous claims, further comprising 
feature C.  
Claim 3 is thus directed to the following subject-matter:  
3. 
A device that is either:  
(a) 
a device comprising features A and C; or  
Part F – Chapter V-10 

 
 
(b) 
a device comprising features A, B and C.  
In this example, feature A is not a special technical feature (i.e. the subject-
matter of claim 1 is either not new or not inventive).  
– 
If both features B and C are special technical features (new and 
inventive) and they are corresponding (that is, they have a technical 
relationship with each other), then the claimed devices A+B and A+C 
are the same invention. Consequently, the device A+B+C is part of 
the same invention as well. There is unity of invention. 
– 
If features B and C are different and are not corresponding (that is, 
they have no technical relationship with each other), then there is a 
lack of unity. There are two inventions: the device having the features 
A+B (claim 1 partially and claim 2 entirely) and the device having the 
features A+C (claim 1 partially and claim 3(a) entirely). The subject-
matter of claim 3(b) has all the features of the first invention (A+B) 
and all the features of the second invention (A+C). Therefore it 
belongs entirely to both inventions at the same time. Therefore the 
search for the first invention mentioned in the claims should, in this 
example, cover not only claim 2 (A+B), but also the subject-matter of 
claim 3(b) (A+B+C). 
The examiner also assesses if a further search fee should be paid for the 
second invention (see F-V, 2.2, F-V, 3.4, B-VII, B-III, 3.8). 
3.2.5 Markush grouping (alternatives in a single claim) 
Where a single claim defines several (chemical or non-chemical) 
alternatives, e.g. it contains a so called "Markush grouping", the 
requirement of Rule 44(1) for same or corresponding special technical 
features is considered met if the alternatives are of a similar nature (see 
F-IV, 3.7). 
When the Markush grouping is for alternatives of chemical compounds, 
they should be regarded as being of a similar nature where: 
(i) 
all alternatives have a common property or activity, and 
(ii) 
a common structure is present, i.e. a significant structural element is 
shared by all of the alternatives, or all alternatives belong to a 
recognised class of chemical compounds in the art to which the 
invention pertains. 
Thus, common matter is provided for a Markush grouping by the common 
property or activity of the alternatives (see (i) above) and the common 
structure defined by (ii) above. 
A "significant structural element is shared by all of the alternatives" if the 
compounds share a common chemical structure that occupies a large 
portion of their structures, or, if the compounds have in common only a 
small portion of their structures, the commonly shared structure constitutes 
a structurally distinctive portion and this structure or portion leads to a 
 

Part F – Chapter V-11 
 
technical contribution in view of existing prior art at hand. The structural 
element may be a single component or a combination of individual 
components linked together. 
There is no need for a significant structural element to be novel in absolute 
terms (i.e. novel per se). Rather, the term "significant" means that in 
relation to the common property or activity, there must be a common part of 
the chemical structure that distinguishes the claimed compounds from any 
known compounds having the same property or activity. 
In other words, the significant structural element defines the technical 
contribution which the claimed invention, considered as a whole, makes 
over the prior art at hand. 
The alternatives belong to a "recognised class of chemical compounds" if 
there is an expectation from the knowledge in the art that members of the 
class will behave in the same way in the context of the claimed invention, 
i.e. that each member could be substituted one for the other, with the 
expectation that the same intended result would be achieved. 
However, if it can be shown that at least one Markush alternative is not 
novel, unity of invention must be reconsidered. In particular, if the structure 
of at least one of the compounds covered by a Markush claim is known, 
together with the property or technical effect under consideration, this is an 
indication of lack of unity of the remaining compounds (alternatives). 
This is because the Markush alternatives comprise no same (c.f. common 
structure) or corresponding (c.f. same property or technical effect) technical 
features that are "special". 
Claims covering different alternative nucleic acids or proteins defined by 
different sequences are equally considered to represent a Markush 
grouping and are also analysed according to the foregoing principles. 
3.2.6 Claims for a known substance for a number of distinct medical 
uses 
For the particular case of claims for a known substance for a number of 
distinct medical uses, see G-VI, 6.1. 
3.2.7 Intermediate and final products 
In the present context of intermediate and final products, the term 
"intermediate" is intended to mean intermediate or starting products. Such 
products are made available with a view to obtaining end products through 
a physical or chemical change in which the intermediate product loses its 
identity. 
The requirement for the same or corresponding special technical features 
(Rule 44(1)) is considered to be met in the context of intermediate and final 
products where: 
(i) 
the intermediate and final products have the same essential 
structural element, i.e. their basic chemical structures are the same 
Part F – Chapter V-12 

 
 
or their chemical structures are technically closely interrelated, the 
intermediate incorporating an essential structural element into the 
final product, and 
(ii) 
the intermediate and final products are technically interrelated, 
i.e. the final product is manufactured directly from the intermediate or 
is separated from it by a small number of intermediates all containing 
the same essential structural element. 
An essential structural element is a chemical structure that defines the 
technical contribution that the claimed inventions, considered as a whole, 
make over the prior art. Typically, the above-mentioned conditions are met 
in the case of a precursor compound yielding the final product directly upon 
reaction. 
Unity of invention may also be present between intermediate and final 
products of which the structures are not known – for example, as between 
an intermediate having a known structure and a final product with unknown 
structure or as between an intermediate of unknown structure and a final 
product of unknown structure. In such cases, there should be sufficient 
evidence to lead one to conclude that the intermediate and final products 
are technically closely interrelated as, for example, when the intermediate 
contains the same essential element as the final product or incorporates an 
essential element into the final product. 
Different intermediate products used in different processes for the 
preparation of the final product may be claimed provided that they have the 
same essential structural element. The intermediate and final products 
should not be separated, in the process leading from one to the other, by 
an intermediate which is not new. Where different intermediates for 
different structural parts of the final product are claimed, unity should not be 
regarded as being present between the intermediates. If the intermediate 
and final products are families of compounds, each intermediate compound 
should correspond to a compound claimed in the family of the final 
products. However, some of the final products may have no corresponding 
compound in the family of the intermediate products, so the two families 
need not be absolutely congruent. 
The mere fact that, besides the ability to be used to produce final products, 
the intermediates also exhibit other possible effects or activities should not 
prejudice unity of invention. 
3.3 Reasoning for a lack of unity objection 
An objection of lack of unity must consist of logically presented, technical 
reasoning containing the basic considerations behind the finding of lack of 
unity. If necessary, it must comprise considerations relating to the number 
and grouping of the claimed separate inventions. 
 

Part F – Chapter V-13 
 
3.3.1 Minimum requirements for reasoning of lack of unity 
When raising a non-unity objection, the division must back it up with a 
minimum reasoning outlining at least the following elements: 
(i) 
the common matter, if any, between the groups of inventions. The 
common matter is based on the same or corresponding technical 
features. It is not confined to individual features but also includes 
synergistic effects being the result of a combination of features, see 
G-VII, 7; 
(ii) 
the reasons why this common matter cannot provide a single general 
inventive concept based on the same or corresponding special 
technical features. This includes prior art or general knowledge or the 
teaching of the application itself which anticipates or renders obvious 
the common matter (and the general problem if applicable). If prior 
art is relied upon, it must be identified, indicating any relevant 
passages and the reasons why they are considered relevant; 
(iii) 
the reasons why there is no technical relationship between the 
remaining technical features of the different groups of claims, 
including: 
(a) 
an identification of any remaining technical features of the 
different groups and the respective claims of each group, with 
an explicit statement that these technical features are different; 
(b) 
for each group, an identification, in the light of the description, 
of the objective technical problem(s) solved by these 
remaining technical features; 
(c) 
why the problem(s) solved are either known from the prior art 
or are different so that the different technical features cannot 
be considered to be "corresponding special technical 
features"; 
(iv) 
in all cases, the minimum reasoning comprises a concluding 
statement that, because neither the same nor corresponding special 
technical features are present in the claims, there is no single 
general inventive concept and the requirements for unity of invention 
are not met; 
(v) 
in special cases, point iii, parts (a) to (c), which prove that there is no 
technical relationship involving the same or corresponding special 
technical features, will be automatically covered if it is explained: 
(1) 
why grouped alternatives of chemical compounds are not of a 
similar nature; 
(2) 
in case of lack of unity between intermediate and final 
products, why the intermediate and final products do not have 
the same essential structural elements and are not technically 
closely interrelated; 
Part F – Chapter V-14 

 
 
(3) 
why a process is not specially adapted to the production of a 
product; 
(4) 
why a product itself does not provide a single general inventive 
concept linking different uses as defined in the claims; 
(5) 
why a use in itself does not provide a single general inventive 
concept linking the subject-matter of the claims. 
3.4 Determination of the invention first mentioned in the claims 
When lack of unity is established, the sequence of the claimed (groups of) 
inventions will normally start with the invention first mentioned in the claims 
("first invention"); see also B-VII, 1.1 and 2.3. In other words, as a general 
rule the division of subject-matter follows the order of appearance of the 
different inventions in the claims. The content of the dependent claims will 
be taken into account when determining the first invention. Trivial claims 
relating exclusively to features that seem unimportant in the light of the 
invention or that are generally known in the technical field of the invention 
are disregarded (see B-III, 3.8 for the search phase). 
However, if the filed claims do not fulfil the requirements of Rule 43(4), i.e. 
if the dependency of the claims is not correct, the claims will be re-ordered 
accordingly before assessing the fulfilment of the requirements of unity. 
4. 
Procedure in the case of lack of unity during search 
The search division may neither refuse the application for lack of unity nor 
require limitation of the claims, but must inform the applicant that, if the 
search report is to be drawn up to cover those inventions present other 
than the first mentioned, then further search fees must be paid within two 
months. This applies even if the search reveals prior art that renders the 
entire subject-matter of the first invention not novel. 
When lack of unity is raised a posteriori, the assessment of the search 
division is provisional (G 2/89) and is based on the prior art at hand when 
the assessment is done. In view of the fact that such novelty and inventive 
step considerations are being made without the applicant having had an 
opportunity to comment, the search division will exercise restraint in this 
assessment and in borderline cases, will preferably refrain from considering 
an application as not complying with the requirement of unity of invention. 
Before issuing an invitation to pay additional fees based on an a posteriori 
assessment (see B-VII, 1.2), the search division will assess the technical 
problem underlying a claimed group of inventions in the light of both the 
disclosure of the application as a whole and the relevant prior art at hand 
revealed by the search (see W 6/97, W 6/91). 
The consideration of the requirement of unity of invention is always made 
with a view to giving the applicant fair treatment and the invitation to pay 
additional fees is made only in clear cases. 
The applicant is never invited to pay an additional search fee for claimed 
inventions that are either not novel or do not possess an inventive step over 
Rule 64(1) 
Rule 164(1) 
Rule 64(1) 
Rule 64(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter V-15 
 
the prior art at hand. Nevertheless, the search division may still raise an 
objection of lack of unity for such alleged "sub-inventions" in view of 
potential amendments that could be reasonably expected in the light of the 
description and any drawings. 
However, if the inventions concern non-obvious alternatives to the 
disclosure of the prior art at hand or technical details of different 
apparatuses/methods/products that require a complete new search for an 
enabling disclosure, the search division may invite the applicant to pay 
additional fees for all the inventions. 
Example: 
The independent claim is directed to a new method to dope a molecule so 
as to enhance its ability to bind to a cellular membrane's receptor. A 
dependent claim claims that the molecule can be doped to bind to several 
different receptors of the membrane. The search reveals that the method of 
the independent claim, applied to one receptor listed in the dependent 
claim, has already been disclosed in the prior art. If the search division is of 
the opinion that the application of the by now known method to the 
alternative receptor is an invention in view of the prior art at hand, it invites 
the applicant to pay additional fees for all the remaining alternatives since a 
complete search needs to be carried out in order to try to retrieve an 
enabling disclosure for each of them. 
4.1 Provisional opinion accompanying the partial search results 
As from 1 April 2017, the EPO provides applicants with a provisional 
opinion on the patentability of the invention (or unitary group of inventions) 
first mentioned in the claims (see OJ EPO 2017, A20). This provisional 
opinion is sent together with the invitation to pay further/additional search 
fees and the partial search results. It also includes the reasons for the 
non-unity findings. 
The provisional opinion is sent for information only. A reply addressing the 
points raised in the provisional opinion is not required and will not be taken 
into account when the extended European search report (EESR) is issued. 
Only the EESR requires a response under Rule 70a. 
The provisional opinion accompanying the partial search results is available 
to the public via online file inspection. 
4.2 Consequences for the applicant 
There is no obligation for applicants to pay any additional fee. 
However, subject-matter that has not been searched will not be examined 
by the examining division (G 2/92). Hence, it cannot be prosecuted in an 
independent claim. 
If the lack of unity persists also in examination after the claims have been 
amended, the excision of the non-searched subject-matter from the 
application may be necessary (see C-III, 3.3 and F-IV, 4.3). 
Part F – Chapter V-16 

 
 
Non-searched subject-matter can always be prosecuted in a divisional 
application. 
5. 
Procedure in the case of lack of unity during substantive 
examination 
5.1 General principles 
The final responsibility for establishing whether the application meets the 
requirement of unity of invention ultimately rests with the examining division 
(see T 631/97; see also C-III, 3.2). For Euro-PCT applications which have 
entered the European phase, see F-V, 7. 
Whether or not the question of unity of invention has been raised by the 
search division, it must always be considered by the examining division. 
The conclusion reached may change, e.g. when further prior art becomes 
available at a later stage of the proceedings. When lack of unity of invention 
arises only during substantive examination, the examining division should 
raise an objection only in clear cases, particularly if substantive 
examination is at an advanced stage (see also H-II, 6.3). 
Whenever unity is found to be lacking, the applicants should be required to 
limit their claims in such a way as to overcome the objection 
(see C-III, 3.2 and C-III, 3.3), which means restricting them to a single 
searched invention (see H-II, 6.1). Excision or amendment of parts of the 
description may also be necessary (see C-III, 3.3). One or more divisional 
applications, covering matter removed to meet this objection, may be filed 
(see C-IX, 1), provided that the parent application is pending (A-IV, 1.1.1). 
5.2 Objections to unsearched inventions 
See H-II, 6.2 and H-II, 6.3. 
5.3 Review of non-unity findings 
The reviewing of non-unity findings and the refund of additional search fees 
are dealt with in C-III, 3.4. 
In so far as the examining division finds that unity of invention is given, if 
the applicant has paid the further search fee(s) and requested a full or 
partial refund thereof, the examining division will order refund of the 
relevant further search fee(s). 
6. 
Amended claims 
For the situation where the applicant submits new claims directed to 
subject-matter which has not been searched e.g. because it was only 
contained in the description and at the search stage it was not found to be 
appropriate to extend the search to this subject-matter, see H-IV, 4.1.2 and 
B-III, 3.5. 
7. 
Euro-PCT applications 
7.1 International applications without supplementary search 
As indicated in B-II, 4.3.1, for certain international applications entering the 
European phase with an international search report, no supplementary 
Rule 36(1) 
Rule 137(5) 
Art. 153(7) 
 

Part F – Chapter V-17 
 
European search is carried out. The following situations may then be 
distinguished during substantive examination: 
(i) 
If, during the international search, an objection of lack of unity has 
been raised and the applicant has not taken the opportunity to have 
the other invention(s) searched by paying additional search fees for 
them, but has taken the opportunity to amend the claims after receipt 
of the international search report (see E-IX, 3.3.1) so that they are 
limited to the invention searched and has indicated that examination 
is to be carried out on these amended claims, the examining division 
proceeds on the basis of these claims. 
(ii) 
If, during the international search, an objection of lack of unity has 
been raised and the applicant has neither taken the opportunity to 
have the other invention(s) searched by paying additional search 
fees for them, nor amended the claims so that they are limited to the 
invention searched, and the examining division agrees with the 
objection of the ISA (taking into account any comments on the issue 
of unity submitted by the applicant in the response to the WO-ISA or 
IPER, see E-IX, 3.3.1), the examining division will then proceed to 
issue an invitation under Rule 164(2) to pay search fees for any 
claimed invention in the application documents for which no 
additional search fee has been paid to the EPO, where it has acted 
as the ISA. 
(iii) 
If additional search fees have been paid during the international 
phase, the applicant may determine that the application is to proceed 
on the basis of any of the searched inventions, the other(s) being 
deleted, if the examining division agrees with the objection of the 
ISA. Where the applicants have not yet taken that decision, the 
examining division will, at the beginning of substantive examination, 
invite them to do so. 
(iv) 
If the claims to be examined relate to an invention which differs from 
any of the originally claimed inventions, the examining division will 
proceed to issue an invitation under Rule 164(2) to pay search fees 
for any claimed invention in the application documents not covered 
by the international search report or supplementary international 
search report, if any (see C-III, 3.1). 
(v) 
If the applicant has not paid additional search fees during the 
international phase and the examining division does not agree with 
the objection of the ISA (for example, because the applicant has 
convincingly argued in response to the WO-ISA or IPER, 
see E-IX, 3.3.1, that the requirement of unity of invention is satisfied), 
an additional search will be performed (see B-II, 4.2(iii)) and the 
examination will be carried out on all claims. 
In cases (i) to (iv), the applicant may file divisional applications for the 
inventions deleted to meet the objection of non-unity (see C-IX, 1 and 
A-IV, 1), provided that, when a divisional application is filed, the application 
being divided is still pending (see A-IV, 1.1.1). 
Rule 164(2) 
Rule 36(1) 
Part F – Chapter V-18 

 
 
7.2 International applications with supplementary search 
For international applications entering the European phase with an 
international search report established by an ISA other than the EPO, a 
supplementary European search is carried out by the search division in the 
cases listed in B-II, 4.3.2. If the search division, during the supplementary 
European search, notes a lack of unity, B-VII, 2.3 applies. 
The procedure before the examining division in such cases is described in 
E-IX, 4.2. In brief, the examining division will proceed with the examination 
of that invention (or group of inventions) covered by the supplementary 
European search report which has been chosen by the applicant in 
response to the ESOP. 
7.3 International preliminary examination report (IPER) 
For international applications entering the European phase with an 
international preliminary examination report, the examining division should 
carefully take into account the position taken in that IPER before deviating 
from it. This may be necessary where the claims have been changed, the 
applicant successfully refutes the objection (either of which may happen in 
response to the IPER, see E-IX, 3.3.1) or the interpretation of the rules 
regarding unity of invention was erroneous; see further F-V, 7.1 and 
F-V, 7.2 above. 
7.4 Restricted IPER 
If the EPO has established an IPER on the application and the applicant 
wishes to obtain protection pertaining to claims which were not the subject 
of this IPER because they were not searched during the international phase 
in consequence of an objection of lack of unity, the applicant can decide to 
have such claims searched in response to the invitation to pay additional 
search fees under Rule 164(2) and choose them for further prosecution. 
Alternatively, the applicant can decide to file one or more divisional 
applications for the inventions not searched, provided that, when a 
divisional application is filed, the application being divided is still pending 
(see A-IV, 1.1.1). 
Art. 153(7) 
Rule 164(1) 
Art. 76 
Rule 164(2) 
 

Part F – Chapter VI-1 
 
Chapter VI – Priority 
1. The right to priority 
In this respect see also A-III, 6. 
1.1 Filing date as effective date 
According to Art. 80, a European application is accorded as its date of filing 
the date on which it satisfies the requirements of Rule 40, or, if filed under 
the PCT, the date on which it satisfies Art. 11 PCT. This date remains 
unchanged except in the special circumstances of late-filed drawings or 
parts of the description provided for in Rule 56 EPC and late-filed correct 
application documents or parts filed under Rule 56a. 
The date of filing may be the only effective date of the application. It will be 
of importance for fixing the expiry of certain time limits (e.g. the date by 
which the designation of the inventor must be filed under Rule 60), for 
determining the state of the art relevant to the novelty or obviousness of the 
subject-matter of the application, and for determining, in accordance with 
Art. 60(2), which of two or more European applications from separate 
persons for the same invention is to proceed to grant. 
1.2 Priority date as effective date 
However, in many cases, a European application will claim the right of 
priority of the date of filing of a previous application. In such cases, it is the 
priority date (i.e. the date of filing of the previous application) which 
becomes the effective date for the purposes mentioned in the preceding 
paragraph. 
1.3 Validly claiming priority 
For a valid claim to priority, the following conditions must be satisfied: 
(i) 
the previous application was filed in or for a state or WTO member 
recognised as giving rise to a priority right in accordance with the 
provisions of the EPC (see also A-III, 6.2); 
(ii) 
the applicant for the European patent was the applicant, or is the 
successor in title to the applicant, who made the previous application 
(see also A-III, 6.1 and, for transfer of partial priority, F-VI, 1.5); 
(iii) 
the European application is made during a period of twelve months 
from the date of filing of the previous application (subject to certain 
exceptions, see A-III, 6.6); and 
(iv) 
the European application is in respect of the same invention as the 
invention disclosed in the previous application, which must be the 
"first application" (see F-VI, 1.4 and 1.4.1). 
The words "in or for" any member state of the Paris Convention or member 
of the WTO, referred to in A-III, 6.2, mean that priority may be claimed in 
respect of a previous national application, a previous European application, 
a previous application filed under another regional patent treaty or a 
previous PCT application. If the previous application was filed in or for an 
Rule 40 
Art. 89 
Art. 87(1), (2) and 
(5) 
Art. 87(2) and 
(3) 
Part F – Chapter VI-2 

 
 
EPC contracting state, this state may also be designated in the European 
application. The previous application may be for a patent or for the 
registration of a utility model or for a utility certificate. However, a priority 
right based on the deposit of an industrial design is not recognised 
(see J 15/80). So long as the contents of the application were sufficient to 
establish a filing date, it can be used to create a priority date, no matter 
what the outcome of the application may be; for example, it may 
subsequently be abandoned or refused (see A-III, 6.2). 
The expression "the same invention" in Art. 87(1) means that the 
subject-matter of a claim in a European application may enjoy the priority of 
a previous application only if the skilled person can derive the 
subject-matter of the claim directly and unambiguously, using common 
general knowledge, from the previous application as a whole. This means 
that the specific combination of features present in the claim must at least 
implicitly be disclosed in the previous application (see F-VI, 2.2 and 
G 2/98). 
1.4 First application 
The filing date of the "first application" must be claimed as a priority, i.e. the 
application disclosing for the first time any or all of the subject-matter of the 
European application. If it is found that the application to which the priority 
claim is directed is in fact not the first application in this sense, but some or 
all of the subject-matter was disclosed in a still earlier application filed by 
the same applicant or a predecessor in title, the priority claim is invalid in so 
far as the subject-matter was already disclosed in the still earlier application 
(see F-VI, 1.4.1). 
To the extent the priority claim is invalid, the effective date of the European 
application is the date of its filing. The previously disclosed subject-matter 
of the European application is not novel if the still earlier application 
referred to above was published prior to the effective date of the European 
application (Art. 54(2)) or if the still earlier application is also a European 
application which was published on or after the effective date of the 
European application in question (Art. 54(3)). 
1.4.1 Subsequent application considered as first application 
A subsequent application for the same subject-matter and filed in or for the 
same state or member of the WTO is considered as the "first application" 
for priority purposes if, at the date this subsequent application was filed, the 
still earlier application had been withdrawn, abandoned or refused, without 
being open to public inspection and without leaving any rights outstanding, 
and had not served as a basis for claiming priority. The EPO will not 
consider this question unless there is evidence of the existence of a still 
earlier application as, for example, in the case of a United States 
continuation-in-part application. Where it is clear that a still earlier 
application for the same subject-matter exists, and where the priority right is 
important because of intervening prior art (see F-VI, 2.1), the applicant is 
required to establish by evidence from an appropriate authority (normally a 
national patent office) that there were no rights outstanding in the still 
earlier application in respect of the subject-matter of the application being 
examined. 
Art. 87(1) 
Art. 87(1) 
Art. 87(4) 
 

Part F – Chapter VI-3 
 
Examples of applications that cannot be recognised as a "first application" 
within the meaning of Art. 87(4) are: 
(i) 
US applications which are a "continuation" of a previous application 
("con"); 
(ii) 
US applications which are a "continuation in part" of a previous 
application ("cip"), in so far as the subject-matter in question was 
already disclosed in the original US application; 
(iii) 
national applications claiming priority from a previous national 
application or national utility model. 
In the case of US con or cip applications, the first sentence of the 
description reads as follows: "This application is a continuation in part 
(continuation) of Serial Number .... filed .....". The following information is 
found on the title page under the heading "CONTINUING DATA******": 
"VERIFIED THIS APPLICATION IS A CIP (or CON) OF ........" A form 
headed "Declaration for Patent Application" must also be attached to the 
end of the application (in this case the priority document), listing earlier 
foreign or US applications under the heading "foreign priority benefits under 
Title 35, United States Code, 119" or "benefit under Title 35, U.S.C., 120 of 
any United States application(s)". 
Applications may be filed by reference to a previously filed application (see 
A-II, 4.1.3.1). If no priority is claimed from this previously filed application, 
the filing by reference itself does not generate outstanding rights according 
to Art. 87(4). 
For example, in the case of national applications GB1 (filed on 1 February 
2002, without claiming priority) and GB2 (filed on 2 January 2008, without 
claiming priority), pertaining to the same subject-matter, a European 
application EP1 (filed on 2 January 2009) claims priority of GB2 but refers 
to GB1 for its content according to Rule 40(1)(c). If GB1 is withdrawn, 
abandoned or refused, without being open to public inspection and without 
having served as a basis for claiming a right of priority, the mere reference 
to it under Rule 40(1)(c) does not amount to an outstanding right within the 
meaning of Art. 87(4). Consequently, in this case the priority claim to GB2 
has to be considered valid for EP1. 
1.5 Multiple priorities and partial priorities 
"Multiple priorities may be claimed" – i.e. a European application may claim 
rights of priority based on more than one previous application (G 2/98). 
"Partial priority" refers to a situation in which only a part of the 
subject-matter encompassed by a generic "OR" claim is entitled to the 
priority date of a previous application (G 1/15). 
The previous application may have been filed in or for the same or different 
states or members of the WTO, but in all cases the earliest application 
must have been filed not more than 12 months before the date of filing of 
the European application. Subject-matter of a European application will be 
Rule 40(1)(c) 
Art. 88(2) and 
(3) 
Part F – Chapter VI-4 

 
 
accorded the priority date of the earliest priority application which discloses 
it. 
If, for instance, the European application describes and claims two 
embodiments (A and B) of an invention, A being disclosed in a French 
application and B in a German application, both filed within the preceding 
12 months, the priority dates of both the French and German applications 
may be claimed for the appropriate parts of the European application; 
embodiment A will have the French priority date and embodiment B the 
German priority date as effective dates. If embodiments A and B are 
claimed as alternatives in one claim, these alternatives will likewise have 
the different priority dates as effective dates. 
If, on the other hand, a European application is based on one previous 
application disclosing a feature C and a second previous application 
disclosing a feature D, neither disclosing the combination of C and D, a 
claim to that combination will be entitled only to the date of filing of the 
European application itself. In other words, it is not permitted to "mosaic" 
priority documents. An exception might arise where one priority document 
contains a reference to the other and explicitly states that features from the 
two documents can be combined in a particular manner. 
According to G 1/15, entitlement to partial priority may not be refused for a 
claim encompassing alternative subject-matter by virtue of one or more 
generic expressions or otherwise (generic "OR" claim) provided that said 
alternative subject-matter has been disclosed for the first time, directly, or 
at least implicitly, unambiguously and in an enabling manner in the priority 
document. No other substantive conditions or limitations apply in this 
respect. 
In assessing whether subject-matter within a generic "OR" claim may enjoy 
partial priority, the first step is to determine the subject-matter disclosed in 
the priority document that is relevant, i.e. relevant in respect of prior art 
disclosed in the priority interval. This is to be done in accordance with the 
disclosure test laid down in the conclusion of G 2/98 and on the basis of 
explanations put forward by the applicant or patent proprietor to support the 
claim to priority, in order to show what the skilled person would have been 
able to derive from the priority document. The next step is to examine 
whether this subject-matter is encompassed by the claim of the application 
or patent claiming said priority. If the answer is yes, the claim is de facto 
conceptually divided into two parts, the first corresponding to the invention 
disclosed directly and unambiguously in the priority document, the second 
being the remaining part of the subsequent generic "OR" claim not enjoying 
this priority but itself giving rise to a right to priority as laid down in 
Art. 88(3). 
 

Part F – Chapter VI-5 
 
For example, if the priority document discloses the use of a specific 
composition whereas the application claims the use of a composition 
defined in more generic terms, two alternative groups of subject-matters 
are identified as being encompassed by the claim, even if the claim does 
not expressly spell them out:  
– 
alternative (a), concerning the use of a specific composition (e.g. 
calcium salt of the active ingredient and tribasic phosphate salt in 
which the cation was multivalent) and 
– 
alternative (b), concerning the use of a composition defined in more 
generic terms (e.g. acid form or acceptable salt thereof as the active, 
inorganic salt in which the cation was multivalent, wherein active 
ingredient and inorganic salt were other than calcium salt of the acid 
and tribasic phosphate salt in combination). 
Alternative (a) is the subject-matter disclosed in the priority document, not 
defined as such in the claim but encompassed by it. Alternative (b) is the 
remaining subject-matter of the claim, which was not disclosed in the 
priority document. In such a situation, the subject-matter of alternative (a) 
enjoys priority whereas that of alternative (b) does not. 
The rationale of decision G 1/15 also applies in the context of deciding 
whether an application from which priority is claimed is the first application 
within the meaning of Art. 87(1). Just as a priority application and a patent 
claiming priority from it may partially relate to the same invention, the 
priority application and an earlier application filed by the same applicant 
may also partially relate to the same invention. In that case, the priority 
application would be the first application in respect of only that part of the 
invention which is not the same as in the earlier application (T 282/12). 
Partial priority may also be transferable separately (T 969/14). This, 
however, has consequences for the remaining priority right because the 
assignor is left with a limited right and may no longer keep claiming that 
partial priority (an applicant can only claim a right which they own). The 
transfer agreement of the partial priority gives a respective partial priority 
right to the assignor and the assignee corresponding to two clearly distinct 
and precisely defined alternatives. 
2. Determining priority dates 
2.1 Examining the validity of a right to priority 
As a general rule, the division does not make any investigation as to the 
validity of a right to priority. However, the priority right assumes importance 
if prior art has to be taken into account which has been made available to 
the public within the meaning of Art. 54(2) on or after the priority date 
claimed and before the date of filing (e.g. an intermediate document, 
see G-IV, 3) or if the content of the European patent application is totally or 
partially identical with the content of another European application within 
the meaning of Art. 54(3), such other application claiming a priority date 
within that period. In such cases (i.e. cases where the art in question would 
be relevant if of earlier date), the division must investigate whether the 
Part F – Chapter VI-6 

 
 
priority date(s) claimed may be accorded to the appropriate parts of the 
application it is examining and informs the applicant of the outcome and 
whether, in consequence, the particular prior art under consideration, 
e.g. the intermediate document, or the other European application forms 
part of the state of the art within the meaning of Art. 54. Also, in the case of 
possible conflict with another European application under Art. 54(3), it may 
be necessary in addition to allocate effective dates to the appropriate parts 
of that other application and to communicate this to the applicant 
analogously (see also G-IV, 3). When the division needs to consider the 
question of priority date, it has to bear in mind all the matters which are 
mentioned in F-VI, 1.3 to 1.5 above. 
If in the case of a Euro-PCT application, where the EPO is acting as a 
designated or elected Office, the priority document is not on file, 
substantive examination may nevertheless be started. In such a case, 
without the priority document being on file, the application may even, where 
appropriate, be refused because the claimed subject-matter lacks novelty 
or inventive step, provided that the relevant state of the art is neither an 
intermediate document nor an Art. 54(3) application. However, no 
European patent may be granted until such time as the priority document is 
on file. In such a case, the applicant is informed that the decision to grant 
will not be taken as long as the priority document is missing. 
If intermediate documents or Art. 54(3) applications exist and the 
patentability of the subject-matter claimed depends on the validity of the 
priority right, substantive examination cannot be finalised as long as the 
priority document is missing. Where the applicants have complied with 
Rule 17.1(a), (b) or (b-bis) PCT, they may not be requested to file the 
priority document. The proceedings have to be stayed and the applicant is 
informed that, since the patentability of the subject-matter claimed depends 
on the validity of the priority right, substantive examination cannot be 
finalised as long as the priority document is not on file. 
2.2 The same invention 
The basic test to determine whether a claim is entitled to the date of a 
priority document is, as far as the requirement of "the same invention" is 
concerned (see F-VI, 1.3(iv)), the same as the test for determining whether 
or not an amendment to an application satisfies the requirement of 
Art. 123(2) (see H-IV, 2). That is to say, for the priority date to be valid in 
this respect the subject-matter of the claim must be directly and 
unambiguously derivable from the disclosure of the invention in the priority 
document, also taking into account any features implicit to a person skilled 
in the art in what is expressly mentioned in the document (see G 2/98). As 
an example of an implicit disclosure, a claim to an apparatus including 
"releasable fastening means" would be entitled to the priority date of a 
disclosure of that apparatus in which different embodiments of releasable 
fastening elements such as a nut and bolt, a spring catch and a 
toggle-operated latch are shown. 
It is not necessary that the subject-matter for which priority is claimed be 
found among any claims in the previous application. It is sufficient that the 
documents of the previous application taken as a whole "specifically 
Art. 88(4) 
 

Part F – Chapter VI-7 
 
disclose" such subject-matter. The description and any claims or drawings 
of the previous application are, therefore, to be considered as a whole in 
deciding this question, except that account is not taken of subject-matter 
found solely in that part of the description referring to prior art, or in an 
explicit disclaimer. 
The requirement that the disclosure must be specific means that it is not 
sufficient if the subject-matter in question is merely referred to in broad and 
general terms. A claim to a detailed embodiment of a certain feature would 
not be entitled to priority on the basis of a mere general reference to that 
feature in a priority document. Exact literal correspondence is not required, 
however. It is enough that, on a reasonable assessment, there is in 
substance a disclosure of the same subject-matter of the claim. 
A disclaimer which is allowable under Art. 123(2) (see H-V, 4.2.1 and 4.2.2) 
does not change the identity of the invention within the meaning of 
Art. 87(1). Therefore, such a disclaimer could be introduced when drafting 
and filing a successive European patent application, without affecting the 
right to priority from the first application not containing the disclaimer 
(see G 1/03, G 2/03 and G 2/10). 
2.3 Priority claim not valid 
If the tests set out in F-VI, 2.2 are not satisfied in relation to a particular 
previous application, then the effective date of the subject-matter of the 
claim in question will either be the filing date of the earliest application 
which does provide the required disclosure and of which the priority is 
validly claimed (see G 3/93) or, in the absence of such, will be the date of 
filing of the European application itself (or the new date of filing if the 
application has been redated under Rule 56 or Rule 56a). 
2.4 Some examples of determining priority dates 
Note: the dates used are merely illustrative; they do not take account of the 
fact that the filing offices of the EPO are closed on weekends and certain 
public holidays. 
2.4.1 Intermediate publication of the contents of the priority 
application 
P is the application from which priority is claimed by EP, D is the disclosure 
of the subject-matter of P. 
1.1.90 
1.5.90 
1.6.90 
Filing 
Publication 
Filing 
P 
D 
EP 
D is state of the art under Art. 54(2) if the priority claim of P is not valid. 
2.4.2 Intermediate publication of another European application 
P1 is the application from which priority is claimed by EP1, P2 the one from 
which EP2 claims priority. EP1 and EP2 are filed by different applicants. 
Part F – Chapter VI-8 

 
 
1.2.89 
1.1.90 
1.2.90 
1.8.90 
1.1.91 
Filing 
Filing 
Filing 
Publication 
Filing 
P1 
P2 
EP1 
EP1 
EP2 
A + B 
A + B 
A + B 
A + B 
A + B 
EP1 is state of the art under Art. 54(3) if the respective priority claims of P1 
and P2 are valid. This does not change if the publication of EP1 takes place 
after the filing date of EP2. The publication of EP1 is state of the art under 
Art. 54(2) if the priority claim of P2 is not valid. 
2.4.3 Multiple priorities claimed for different inventions in the 
application with an intermediate publication of one of the inventions 
EP claims priority of P1 and P2, D is the disclosure of A+B. 
1.1.90 
1.2.90 
1.3.90 
1.6.90 
Filing 
Publication 
Filing 
Filing 
P1 
D 
P2 
EP 
A + B 
A + B 
A + B + C 
claim 1: A + B 
 
 
claim 2: A + B + C 
Claim 1 has a valid priority of P1 for its subject-matter, thus publication D is 
not state of the art under Art. 54(2) against this claim. Claim 2 cannot 
benefit from the priority of P1, as it does not concern the same 
subject-matter. Thus publication D is state of the art under Art. 54(2) for this 
claim (see G 3/93). It is immaterial whether claim 2 is in the form of a 
dependent or an independent claim. 
2.4.4 A situation in which it has to be checked whether the 
application from which priority is actually claimed is the "first 
application" within the meaning of Art. 87(1) 
P1 is the earliest application of the same applicant containing the invention. 
EP claims the priority of the later US application P2, which is a 
"continuation-in-part" of P1. D is a public disclosure of A+B.  
1.7.89 
1.1.90 
1.6.90 
1.12.90 
Filing 
Filing 
Publication 
Filing 
P1 
P2 (cip) 
D 
EP 
A + B 
A + B 
A + B 
claim 1: A + B 
A + B + C 
 
claim 2: A + B + C 
The priority claim of P2 for claim 1 is not valid as P2 is not the "first 
application" for this subject-matter within the meaning of Art. 87(1), but P1 
is, which has "left rights outstanding" in that P2 is a "continuation-in-part" 
thereof. Therefore Art. 87(4) does not apply and this is not altered by an 
abandonment, withdrawal, refusal or non-publication of P1. D is prior art 
pursuant to Art. 54(2) against claim 1, but not against claim 2, as the latter 
claim has the earlier priority of P2. 
 

Part F – Chapter VI-9 
 
3. Claiming priority 
3.1 General remarks 
An applicant who wishes to claim priority must file a declaration of priority 
giving particulars of the previous filing, as specified in Rule 52(1), together 
with a certified copy of the previous application and, if necessary for the 
assessment of patentability, a translation of it into one of the EPO official 
languages (see A-III, 6.7 and A-III, 6.8). 
3.2 Declaration of priority 
A declaration of priority from an earlier filing should preferably be made at 
the time of filing the European application, although this can be done at any 
time 
within 
16 months 
from 
the 
earliest 
priority 
date 
claimed 
(see A-III, 6.5.1). The declaration of priority must indicate the date of the 
priority application, the relevant state party to the Paris Convention or 
member of the WTO, and the file number. 
A declaration of priority may be corrected within 16 months from the earliest 
priority date. This time limit cannot expire earlier than four months after the 
filing date (see A-III, 6.5.2). 
3.3 Certified copy of the previous application (priority document) 
The certified copy of the previous application, i.e. the priority document, 
must be filed within 16 months of the priority date (see A-III, 6.7; for 
Euro-PCT cases see, however, E-IX, 2.3.5), unless such a copy is already 
on file because it has been supplied in the context of Rule 40(3), see 
A-II, 4.1.3.1, or of a request pursuant to Rule 56 or Rule 56a, see A-II, 5.4.3 
and A-II, 6.4.2. 
Moreover, in accordance with Rule 53(2) and the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 9 August 2012, OJ EPO 2012, 492, the EPO will include 
a copy of the previous application in the file of the European patent 
application without charging a fee in the cases indicated in A-III, 6.7. 
3.4 Translation of the previous application 
A translation of the previous application into one of the official languages of 
the EPO is required only if it is needed for determining the validity of the 
priority claim, where this is of relevance to the patentability of the 
underlying invention. The translation must be filed within the time limit set 
by the EPO. For more details on the procedure, see A-III, 6.8 and 
subsections. 
Alternatively, under Rule 53(3), a declaration that the European patent 
application is a complete translation of the previous application may be 
submitted within that same time limit. This declaration must be 
unambiguous, stating that the translation is "complete" or, for example, 
"identical" or "literal". Declarations in diluted or modified form (stating, for 
example, that the translation is "practically complete" or that the contents 
"are essentially the same") cannot be accepted. The same applies to cases 
where the declaration is obviously incorrect (e.g. if several priorities are 
claimed for a single European application or if the European application 
contains more or less text than is contained in the previous application as 
Art. 88(1) 
Rule 52(1) 
Rule 53(1) and 
Rule 53(3) 
Rule 52(1) and 
Rule 52(2) 
Rule 52(3) 
Rule 53(1) 
Rule 53(2) 
Art. 88(1) 
Rule 53(3) 
Part F – Chapter VI-10 

 
 
filed). In all these cases a complete translation must be filed. Where the 
European application contains claims on its date of filing and the priority 
application did not contain claims on its filing date or contained fewer 
claims on its filing date than the subsequent European application, the 
declaration cannot be accepted. A merely different arrangement of the 
various elements of the application (e.g. presenting the claims before the 
description, or vice versa) does not affect the validity of such a declaration. 
See also A-III, 6.8.6. 
The translation or declaration under Rule 53(3) must also be filed in those 
cases where the EPO adds a copy of the previous application to the file 
(see the notice from the EPO, OJ EPO 2002, 192). 
If the applicant has already provided the EPO with a translation of the 
priority document as part of a request under Rule 56 (see A-II, 5.4(vi)) to 
base missing parts of the description or drawings on the priority application 
itself or under Rule 56a to base correct application documents or parts on it 
(see A-II, 6.4.3), then there is no need for the applicant to file the translation 
a second time. 
The request for translation cannot be made by telephone (regardless of 
whether this is mentioned in the minutes). Because of the time limit and its 
possible legal consequences, the request must always be made in writing. 
In examination proceedings it may be issued alone or may accompany a 
communication under Art. 94(3). The translation of the priority document 
may become necessary only at later stages of the examination procedure, 
when documents are retrieved by carrying out a "topping-up" search for 
conflicting applications under Art. 54(3) (see C-IV, 7.1 and A-III, 6.8.2). This 
may also happen during opposition proceedings where the applicant was 
not requested to file the translation before grant and the opponent raises 
patentability issues which require examination of the validity of the priority. 
If the required translation or declaration is not filed within the time limit, the 
right of priority is lost and the applicant or proprietor is informed accordingly 
(see A-III, 6.11). This has the effect that the intermediate document(s) will 
become prior art under Art. 54(2) or Art. 54(3), as applicable, and therefore 
relevant for the assessment of patentability (see A-III, 6.8.3). However, for 
reasons of legal certainty the right of priority remains effective for 
determining the state of the art for the purposes of Art. 54(3) 
(see F-VI, 2.1 and 3.5) in respect of any other European patent application. 
In that respect it is immaterial whether the translation or declaration has 
been filed, as changes taking effect after the date of publication do not 
affect the application of Art. 54(3). 
If the required translation or declaration is filed within the time limit, ideally 
with accompanying observations, the extent of the validity of the priority 
and the co-dependent substantive issues will be examined. 
3.5 Withdrawal of priority claim 
Applicants may voluntarily withdraw a claimed priority at any time. If they do 
so before the technical preparations for publication have been completed, 
then the priority date is not effective and the publication is deferred until 
Rule 56 and Rule 56a 
 

Part F – Chapter VI-11 
 
18 months after the filing date. If it is withdrawn after the technical 
preparations for publication have been completed, then the application is 
still published 18 months after the priority date originally claimed 
(see A-VI, 1.1 and G-IV, 5.1.1). 
3.6 Re-establishment of rights in respect of the priority period 
Applicants may file a request for re-establishment of rights in respect of the 
priority 
period 
under 
Art. 122 
(see A-III, 6.6). 
Any 
request 
for 
re-establishment of rights in respect of the period specified in Art. 87(1) 
must be filed within two months of expiry of that period, according to 
Rule 136(1), second sentence. Where a request for re-establishment in 
respect of the priority period has been allowed, the examining division 
carefully reviews the relevance of prior-art documents cited previously in 
the search report or communications.  
Art. 122 
Rule 136(1) 
 
 
Part G – Chapter I-1 
 
Chapter I – Patentability 
1. Patentability requirements 
There are four basic requirements for patentability: 
(i) 
there must be an "invention", belonging to any field of technology 
(see G-II); 
(ii) 
the invention must be "susceptible of industrial application" 
(see G-III); 
(iii) 
the invention must be "new" (see G-IV to VI); and 
(iv) 
the invention must involve an "inventive step" (see G-VII). 
A technical character is an implicit requisite for the presence of an 
"invention" within the meaning of Art. 52(1) (requirement (i) above, see G-II, 
1 and 2 for further details). 
Furthermore, 
– 
the invention must be such that it can be carried out by a person 
skilled in the art (after proper instruction by the application). 
Instances where the invention fails to satisfy this requirement are 
given in F-III, 3; and 
– 
the invention must relate to a technical field (Rule 42(1)(a) – see 
F-II, 4.2), must be concerned with a technical problem (Rule 42(1)(c) 
– see F-II, 4.5) and must have technical features in terms of which 
the matter for which protection is sought can be defined in the claim 
(Rule 43(1) – see F-IV, 2.1). 
2. Technical progress, advantageous effect 
The EPC does not require explicitly or implicitly that an invention, to be 
patentable, must entail some technical progress or even any useful effect. 
Nevertheless, an advantageous effect, if any, with respect to the state of 
the art should be stated in the description (Rule 42(1)(c)), as any such 
effect is often important in determining "inventive step" (see G-VII, 5). 
Art. 52(1) 
Art. 83 
Rule 42(1)(a) and 
Rule 42(1)(c) 
Rule 43(1) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-1 
 
Chapter II – Inventions 
1. General remarks 
The EPC does not define what is meant by "invention", but Art. 52(2) 
contains a non-exhaustive list of "non-inventions", i.e. subject-matter which 
is not to be regarded as an invention within the meaning of Art. 52(1). The 
items on this list are all either abstract (e.g. discoveries or scientific 
theories) and/or non-technical (e.g. aesthetic creations or presentations of 
information). In contrast to this, an "invention" within the meaning of 
Art. 52(1) must have a technical character (see G-I, 1). It may be in any 
field of technology. 
2. Examination practice 
The question of whether there is an invention within the meaning of 
Art. 52(1) is separate and distinct from the questions of whether it is 
susceptible of industrial application, is new and involves an inventive step.  
The exclusions from patentability under Art. 52(2) play a role in assessing 
both patent eligibility and inventive step because patent protection is 
reserved for inventions involving a "technical teaching", i.e. an instruction 
addressed to a skilled person as to how to solve a particular technical 
problem using particular technical means. This twofold assessment is 
referred to as the "two-hurdle approach" (G 1/19).  
The first hurdle, also referred to as the patent eligibility hurdle, requires that 
the claimed subject-matter as a whole must not fall under the 
"non-inventions" defined in 
Art. 52(2) and (3). The exclusion from 
patentability of the subject-matters and activities referred to in Art. 52(2) is 
limited by Art. 52(3) to such subject-matters or activities that are claimed 
"as such". This limitation is a bar to a broad interpretation of the 
non-inventions. It implies that one technical feature is sufficient for 
eligibility: If the claimed subject-matter is directed to or uses technical 
means, it is an invention within the meaning of Art. 52(1). This assessment 
is made without reference to the prior art. 
The second hurdle is where inventive step is assessed. In addition to 
technical features, claims may also comprise non-technical features. In this 
context, the term "non-technical features" refers to features which, on their 
own, would be considered "non-inventions" under Art. 52(2). Inventive step 
of claims comprising such a mix of technical and non-technical features is 
assessed using the COMVIK approach (G-VII, 5.4). This approach is a 
special application of the problem-solution approach that involves 
establishing which features of the invention contribute to its technical 
character (i.e. contribute to the technical solution of a technical problem by 
providing a technical effect). A feature may support the presence of an 
inventive step if and to the extent that it contributes to the technical 
character of the invention. Whether any feature contributes to the technical 
character of the invention has to be assessed in the context of the invention 
as a whole. 
Art. 52(2) and (3) 
Part G – Chapter II-2 

 
 
3. 
List of exclusions 
The items on the list in Art. 52(2) will now be dealt with in turn, and further 
examples will be given in order better to clarify the distinction between what 
is patentable in the sense of not being excluded from patentability under 
Art. 52(2) and (3) and what is not. 
3.1 Discoveries 
If a new property of a known material or article is found, that is mere 
discovery and unpatentable because discovery as such has no technical 
effect and is therefore not an invention within the meaning of Art. 52(1). If, 
however, that property is put to practical use, then this constitutes an 
invention which may be patentable. For example, the discovery that a 
particular known material is able to withstand mechanical shock would not 
be patentable, but a railway sleeper made from that material could well be 
patentable. To find a previously unrecognised substance occurring in 
nature is also mere discovery and therefore unpatentable. However, if a 
substance found in nature can be shown to produce a technical effect, it 
may be patentable. An example of such a case is that of a substance 
occurring in nature which is found to have an antibiotic effect. In addition, if 
a microorganism is discovered to exist in nature and to produce an 
antibiotic, the microorganism itself may also be patentable as one aspect of 
the invention. Similarly, a gene which is discovered to exist in nature may 
be patentable if a technical effect is revealed, e.g. its use in making a 
certain polypeptide or in gene therapy. 
For further specific issues concerning biotechnological inventions 
see G-II, 5, 5.3 to 5.5, and G-III, 4. 
3.2 Scientific theories 
These are a more generalised form of discoveries, and the same principle 
as set out in G-II, 3.1 applies. For example, the physical theory of 
semiconductivity would not be patentable. However, new semiconductor 
devices and processes for manufacturing these may be patentable. 
3.3 Mathematical methods 
Mathematical methods play an important role in the solution of technical 
problems in all fields of technology. However, they are excluded from 
patentability under Art. 52(2)(a) when claimed as such (Art. 52(3)). 
The exclusion applies if a claim is directed to a purely abstract 
mathematical method and the claim does not require any technical means. 
For instance, a method for performing a Fast Fourier Transform on 
abstract data which does not specify the use of any technical means is a 
mathematical method as such. A purely abstract mathematical object or 
concept, e.g. a particular type of geometric object or of graph with nodes 
and edges, is not a method but is nevertheless not an invention within the 
meaning of Art. 52(1) because it lacks a technical character. 
If a claim is directed either to a method involving the use of technical 
means (e.g. a computer) or to a device, its subject-matter has a technical 
character as a whole and is thus not excluded from patentability under 
Art. 52(2) and (3). 
Art. 52(2)(a) 
Art. 52(2)(a) 
Art. 52(2)(a) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-3 
 
Merely specifying the technical nature of the data or parameters of the 
mathematical method may not be sufficient on its own to define an 
invention within the meaning of Art. 52(1). Even if the resulting method 
would not be considered a purely abstract mathematical method as such 
within the meaning of Art. 52(2)(a) and (3), it may still fall under the 
excluded category of methods for performing mental acts as such if no use 
of technical means is implied (Art. 52(2)(c) and (3); see G-II, 3.5.1). 
Once it is established that the claimed subject-matter as a whole is not 
excluded from patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3) and is thus an invention 
within the meaning of Art. 52(1), it is examined in respect of the other 
requirements of patentability, in particular novelty and inventive step 
(G-I, 1). 
For the assessment of inventive step, all features which contribute to the 
technical character of the invention must be taken into account (G-VII, 5.4). 
When the claimed invention is based on a mathematical method, it is 
assessed whether the mathematical method contributes to the technical 
character of the invention. 
A mathematical method may contribute to the technical character of an 
invention, i.e. contribute to producing a technical effect that serves a 
technical purpose, by its application to a field of technology and/or by being 
adapted to a specific technical implementation (T 2330/13). The criteria for 
assessing these two situations are explained below. 
Technical applications 
When assessing the contribution made by a mathematical method to the 
technical character of an invention, it must be taken into account whether 
the method, in the context of the invention, produces a technical effect 
serving a technical purpose. 
Examples of technical contributions of a mathematical method are: 
– 
controlling a specific technical system or process, e.g. an X-ray 
apparatus or a steel cooling process; 
– 
determining from measurements a required number of passes of a 
compaction machine to achieve a desired material density; 
– 
digital 
audio, 
image 
or 
video 
enhancement 
or 
analysis, 
e.g. de-noising, detecting persons in a digital image, estimating the 
quality of a transmitted digital audio signal; 
– 
separation of sources in speech signals; speech recognition, 
e.g. mapping a speech input to a text output; 
– 
encoding data for reliable and/or efficient transmission or storage 
(and corresponding decoding), e.g. error-correction coding of data for 
transmission over a noisy channel, compression of audio, image, 
video or sensor data; 
Part G – Chapter II-4 

 
 
– 
encrypting/decrypting 
or 
signing 
electronic 
communications; 
generating keys in an RSA cryptographic system; 
– 
optimising load distribution in a computer network; 
– 
determining the energy expenditure of a subject by processing data 
obtained from physiological sensors; deriving the body temperature 
of a subject from data obtained from an ear temperature detector; 
– 
providing a genotype estimate based on an analysis of DNA 
samples, as well as providing a confidence interval for this estimate 
so as to quantify its reliability; 
– 
providing a medical diagnosis by an automated system processing 
physiological measurements. 
A generic purpose such as "controlling a technical system" is not sufficient 
to confer a technical character to the mathematical method. The technical 
purpose must be a specific one. 
Furthermore, the mere fact that a mathematical method may serve a 
technical purpose is not sufficient, either. The claim is to be functionally 
limited to the technical purpose, either explicitly or implicitly. This can be 
achieved by establishing a sufficient link between the technical purpose 
and the mathematical method steps, for example, by specifying how the 
input and the output of the sequence of mathematical steps relate to the 
technical purpose so that the mathematical method is causally linked to a 
technical effect. 
Defining the nature of the data input to a mathematical method does not 
necessarily imply that the mathematical method contributes to the technical 
character of the invention (T 2035/11, T 1029/06, T 1161/04). 
If steps of a mathematical method are used to derive or predict the physical 
state of an existing real object from measurements of physical properties, 
as in the case of indirect measurements, those steps make a technical 
contribution regardless of what use is made of the results. 
Technical implementations 
A mathematical method may also contribute to the technical character of 
the invention independently of any technical application when the claim is 
directed to a specific technical implementation of the mathematical 
method and the mathematical method is particularly adapted for that 
implementation in that its design is motivated by technical considerations of 
the internal functioning of the computer system or network (T 1358/09, 
G 1/19). This may happen if the mathematical method is designed to exploit 
particular technical properties of the technical system on which it is 
implemented to bring about a technical effect such as efficient use of 
computer storage capacity or network bandwidth. For instance, the 
adaptation of a polynomial reduction algorithm to exploit wordsize shifts 
matched to the word size of the computer hardware is based on such 
 

Part G – Chapter II-5 
 
technical considerations and can contribute to producing the technical 
effect of an efficient hardware implementation of said algorithm. Another 
example is assigning the execution of data-intensive training steps of a 
machine-learning algorithm to a graphical processing unit (GPU) and 
preparatory steps to a standard central processing unit (CPU) to take 
advantage of the parallel architecture of the computing platform. The claim 
should be directed to the implementation of the steps on the GPU and CPU 
for this mathematical method to contribute to the technical character. 
Computational efficiency 
If the mathematical method does not serve a technical purpose and the 
claimed technical implementation does not go beyond a generic technical 
implementation, the mathematical method does not contribute to the 
technical character of the invention. In such a case, it is not sufficient that 
the mathematical method is algorithmically more efficient than prior-art 
mathematical methods to establish a technical effect (see also G-II, 3.6). 
However, if it is established that the mathematical method produces a 
technical effect due to having been applied to a field of technology and/or 
adapted to a specific technical implementation, the computational efficiency 
of the steps affecting that established technical effect is to be taken into 
account when assessing inventive step. See G-II, 3.6.4 for examples where 
an improvement in computational efficiency qualifies as a technical effect. 
3.3.1 Artificial intelligence and machine learning 
Artificial intelligence and machine learning are based on computational 
models and algorithms for classification, clustering, regression and 
dimensionality reduction, such as neural networks, genetic algorithms, 
support vector machines, k-means, kernel regression and discriminant 
analysis. Such computational models and algorithms are per se of an 
abstract mathematical nature, irrespective of whether they can be "trained" 
based on training data. Hence, the guidance provided in G-II, 3.3 generally 
applies also to such computational models and algorithms. 
Terms such as "support vector machine", "reasoning engine" or "neural 
network" may, depending on the context, merely refer to abstract models or 
algorithms and thus do not, on their own, necessarily imply the use of a 
technical means. This has to be taken into account when examining 
whether the claimed subject-matter has a technical character as a whole 
(Art. 52(1), (2) and (3)). 
Artificial intelligence and machine learning find applications in various fields 
of technology. For example, the use of a neural network in a heart 
monitoring apparatus for the purpose of identifying irregular heartbeats 
makes a technical contribution. The classification of digital images, videos, 
audio or speech signals based on low-level features (e.g. edges or pixel 
attributes for images) are further typical technical applications of 
classification algorithms. Further examples of technical purposes for which 
artificial intelligence and machine learning could be used may be found in 
the list under G-II, 3.3. 
Part G – Chapter II-6 

 
 
Classifying text documents solely in respect of their textual content is 
however not regarded to be per se a technical purpose but a linguistic one 
(T 1358/09). Classifying abstract data records or even "telecommunication 
network data records" without any indication of a technical use being made 
of the resulting classification is also not per se a technical purpose, even if 
the classification algorithm may be considered to have valuable 
mathematical properties such as robustness (T 1784/06). 
Where a classification method serves a technical purpose, the steps of 
generating the training set and training the classifier may also contribute to 
the technical character of the invention if they support achieving that 
technical purpose. 
The technical effect that a machine learning algorithm achieves may be 
readily apparent or established by explanations, mathematical proof, 
experimental data or the like. While mere allegations are not enough, 
comprehensive proof is not required either. If the technical effect is 
dependent on particular characteristics of the training dataset used, those 
characteristics that are required to reproduce the technical effect must be 
disclosed unless the skilled person can determine them without undue 
burden using common general knowledge. However, in general, there is no 
need to disclose the specific training dataset itself (see also F-III, 3 and 
G-VII, 5.2). 
3.3.2 Simulation, design or modelling 
Claims directed to methods of simulation, design or modelling typically 
comprise features which fall under the category of mathematical methods 
or of methods for performing mental acts. Hence, the claimed 
subject-matter as a whole may fall under the exclusions from patentability 
mentioned under Art. 52(2)(a)(c) and (3) (see G-II, 3.3 and 3.5.1). 
The methods considered in this section, however, are at least partially 
computer-implemented so that the claimed subject-matter as a whole is not 
excluded from patentability. 
Computer-implemented methods of simulating, designing or modelling 
should be examined according to the same criteria as any other computer-
implemented inventions (G-VII, 5.4, G 1/19). 
For establishing the presence of a technical effect, it is not decisive whether 
the simulated system or process is technical or whether the simulation 
reflects technical principles underlying the simulated system and how 
accurately it does so. 
Simulations interacting with the external physical reality 
Computer-implemented simulations that comprise features representing an 
interaction with an external physical reality at the level of their input or 
output may provide a technical effect related to this interaction. A computer-
implemented simulation that uses measurements as input may form part of 
an indirect measurement method that calculates or predicts the physical 
 

Part G – Chapter II-7 
 
state of an existing real object and thus make a technical contribution 
regardless of what use is made of the results. 
Purely numerical simulations 
A computer-implemented simulation without an input or output having a 
direct link with physical reality may still solve a technical problem. In such a 
"purely numerical" simulation, the underlying models and algorithms may 
contribute to the technical character of the invention by their adaptation to a 
specific technical implementation or by an intended technical use of 
the data resulting from the simulation. 
Models and algorithms that do not make a contribution to the technical 
character of the invention form constraints that may be included in the 
formulation of the objective technical problem when following the COMVIK 
approach outlined in G-VII, 5.4. 
Specific technical implementation of a numerical simulation 
The technical contribution that may be made by a model or algorithm 
because of their adaptation to the internal functioning of the computer 
system or network on which they are implemented is assessed in the same 
manner as adaptations of mathematical methods to specific technical 
implementations, see G-II, 3.3. 
Intended technical use of the calculated numerical output data of a 
numerical simulation 
Calculated numerical data reflecting the physical state or behaviour of a 
system or process existing only as a model in a computer usually cannot 
contribute to the technical character of the invention, even if it reflects the 
behaviour of the real system or process adequately. 
Calculated numerical data may have a "potential technical effect", which 
is the technical effect that will be produced when the data is used according 
to an intended technical use. Such a potential technical effect may only be 
considered in the assessment of inventive step if the intended technical use 
is either explicitly or implicitly specified in the claim.  
If the data resulting from a numerical simulation is specifically adapted for 
an intended technical use, e.g. it is control data for a technical device, a 
potential technical effect of the data can be considered "implied" by the 
claim. The specific adaptation implies that the claim does not encompass 
other non-technical uses because the intended technical use is then 
inherent to the claimed subject-matter over substantially the whole scope of 
the claim (see also G-II, 3.6.3). On the other hand, if the claim also 
encompasses non-technical uses of the simulation results (such as gaining 
scientific knowledge about a technical or natural system), the potential 
technical effect is not achieved over substantially the whole scope of the 
claim and therefore cannot be relied on in the assessment of inventive step. 
Part G – Chapter II-8 

 
 
Accuracy 
Whether a simulation contributes to the technical character of the claimed 
subject-matter does not depend on the quality of the underlying model or 
the degree to which the simulation represents reality.  
However, the accuracy of a simulation is a factor that may have an 
influence on an already established technical effect going beyond the mere 
implementation of the simulation on a computer. It may be that an alleged 
improvement is not achieved if the simulation is not accurate enough for its 
intended technical use. This may be taken into account in the formulation of 
the objective technical problem (Art. 56) or in the assessment of sufficiency 
of disclosure (Art. 83), see F-III, 12. Conversely, a technical effect may still 
be achieved by a method where certain simulation parameters are 
inaccurate but sufficient for its intended technical use. 
Design processes 
The aforementioned principles apply equally if a computer-implemented 
simulation is claimed as part of a design process. 
If a computer-implemented method results merely in an abstract model of a 
product, system or process, e.g. a set of equations, this per se is not 
considered to be a technical effect, even if the modelled product, system or 
process is technical (T 49/99, T 42/09). For example, a logical data model 
for a family of product configurations has no inherent technical character, 
and a method merely specifying how to proceed to arrive at such a logical 
data model would not make a technical contribution beyond its 
computer-implementation. Likewise, a method merely specifying how to 
describe a multi-processor system in a graphical modelling environment 
does 
not 
make 
a 
technical 
contribution 
beyond 
its 
computer-implementation. Reference is made to G-II, 3.6.2 related to 
information modelling as an intellectual activity. 
3.4 Aesthetic creations 
Subject-matter relating to aesthetic creations will usually have both 
technical aspects, e.g. a "substrate" such as a canvas or a cloth, and 
aesthetic aspects, the appreciation of which is essentially subjective, 
e.g. the form of the image on the canvas or the pattern on the cloth. If 
technical aspects are present in such an aesthetic creation, it is not an 
aesthetic creation "as such" and it is not excluded from patentability. 
A feature which might not reveal a technical aspect when taken by itself 
could have a technical character if it brings about a technical effect. For 
example, the pattern of a tyre tread may actually be a further technical 
feature of the tyre if, for example, it provides improved channelling of water. 
On the contrary, this would not be the case when a particular colour of the 
sidewall of the tyre serves only an aesthetic purpose. 
The aesthetic effect itself is not patentable, neither in a product nor in a 
process claim. 
Art. 52(2)(b) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-9 
 
For example, features relating solely to the aesthetic or artistic effect of the 
information content of a book, or to its layout or letter font, would not be 
considered as technical features. Nor would features such as the aesthetic 
effect of the subject of a painting or the arrangement of its colours or its 
artistic (e.g. Impressionist) style be technical. Nevertheless, if an aesthetic 
effect is obtained by a technical structure or other technical means, 
although the aesthetic effect itself is not of a technical character, the means 
of obtaining it may be. For example, a fabric may be provided with an 
attractive appearance by means of a layered structure not previously used 
for this purpose, in which case a fabric incorporating such structure might 
be patentable. 
Similarly, a book defined by a technical feature of the binding or pasting of 
the back is not excluded from patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3), even 
though it has an aesthetic effect too. A painting defined by the kind of cloth, 
or by the dyes or binders used, is likewise not excluded. 
A technical process, even if it is used to produce an aesthetic creation 
(such as a cut diamond), is nevertheless a technical process which is not 
excluded from patentability. Similarly, a printing technique for a book 
resulting in a particular layout with aesthetic effect is not excluded, and nor 
is the book as a product of that process. Again, a substance or composition 
defined by technical features serving to produce a special effect with regard 
to scent or flavour, e.g. to maintain a scent or flavour for a prolonged period 
or to accentuate it, is not excluded. 
3.5 Schemes, rules and methods for performing mental acts, playing 
games or doing business 
3.5.1 Schemes, rules and methods for performing mental acts 
The exclusion from patentability of schemes, rules and methods for 
performing mental acts under Art. 52(2)(c) concerns instructions to the 
human mind on how to conduct cognitive, conceptual or intellectual 
processes, for instance how to learn a language. The exclusion applies 
only when such schemes, rules and methods are claimed as such 
(Art. 52(3)). 
If a method claim encompasses a purely mental realisation of all method 
steps, it falls under the category of methods for performing mental acts as 
such (Art. 52(2)(c) and (3)). This applies regardless of whether the claim 
encompasses also technical embodiments and of whether the method is 
based on technical considerations (T 914/02, T 471/05, G 3/08). 
An example is a claim defining a method for designing an arrangement for 
loading nuclear reactor fuel bundles into a reactor core in order to maximise 
the amount of energy that is generated before the reactor fuel needs to be 
refreshed. The method involves determining optimal values for specific 
technical parameters of the arrangement by starting with initial values, 
performing simulations based on these values, and iteratively changing the 
values based on simulation results until a stopping criterion is met. Such a 
method is based on technical considerations related to the technical field of 
nuclear reactors. However, as long as the claim does not exclude that all 
Art. 52(2)(c) 
Part G – Chapter II-10 

 
 
method steps may be carried out mentally, the claimed subject-matter is 
excluded from patentability. This objection also applies when the simulation 
involves real world values obtained by a technical measurement, if the 
claim does not include either a step of carrying out the technical 
measurement or a step of receiving the measured real world values using 
technical means. 
In general, the complexity of a method cannot disqualify it as a method for 
performing mental acts as such. If technical means (e.g. a computer) are 
necessary to carry out the method, they are included in the claim as an 
essential feature (Art. 84, F-IV, 4.5). See also G-II, 3.3 for aspects related 
to algorithmic efficiency. 
A claimed method is not a method for performing mental acts as such if it 
requires the use of technical means (e.g. a computer, a measuring device, 
etc.) to carry out at least one of its steps or if it provides a physical entity as 
the resulting product (e.g. if it is a method of manufacturing a product 
comprising steps of designing the product and a step of manufacturing the 
product so designed). 
Once it is established that the claimed method as a whole is not excluded 
from patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3), it is examined in respect of the 
other requirements of patentability, in particular novelty and inventive step 
(G-I, 1). 
Where a claim defining a method for performing mental acts as such is 
limited by specifying that the method is carried out by a computer, not only 
the use of a computer but also the steps carried out by the computer 
themselves may make a technical contribution if they then contribute to a 
technical effect. The presence of technical considerations, such as those 
related to the technical field of nuclear reactors in the example above, is not 
in itself sufficient to acknowledge the presence of a technical effect 
(G 1/19). 
A method comprising steps which involve the use of technical means may 
also specify steps which are to be carried out mentally by the user of the 
method. These mental steps contribute to the technical character of the 
method only if, in the context of the invention, they contribute to producing 
a technical effect serving a technical purpose. 
For example, a method may specify steps which result in the selection of a 
product among a family of products based on various criteria, as well as a 
step of manufacturing the selected product. If said selection steps are 
carried out mentally, they contribute to the technical character of the 
method only to the extent that a technical effect can be derived from the 
features characterising the sub-family of selected products over the generic 
family of suitable products (T 619/02). If the selection steps rely on purely 
aesthetic criteria, they result in a non-technical selection and thus do not 
contribute to the technical character of the method. As another example, in 
a method of affixing a driver to a Coriolis mass flowmeter, steps specifying 
how to select the position of the driver so as to maximise the performance 
 

Part G – Chapter II-11 
 
of the flowmeter make a technical contribution to the extent that they define 
that particular position (T 1063/05). 
For additional information about methods of simulation, design and 
modelling, see G-II, 3.3.2. For methods of information modelling and the 
activity of programming a computer, see G-II, 3.6.2. 
3.5.2 Schemes, rules and methods for playing games 
Under Art. 52(2)(c) and (3), schemes, rules and methods for playing games 
are excluded from patentability, if claimed as such. The exclusion applies to 
rules for traditional games such as card or board games, as well as to 
game rules that underlie contemporary forms of gameplay such as in 
gambling machines or video games. 
Game rules define a conceptual framework of conventions and conditions 
that govern player conduct and how a game evolves in response to 
decisions and actions by the players. They comprise the setup of the game, 
options that arise as gameplay unfolds, as well as goals defining progress 
in the game. They are normally perceived (or even agreed to) by the 
players as rules serving the explicit purpose of playing the game. Game 
rules are hence of an abstract, purely mental nature and are meaningful 
only in the gaming context (T 336/07). For example, a condition requiring 
two randomly drawn numbers to match for winning is a game rule. 
Contemporary games, and in particular video games, are often 
characterised by complex interactive and narrative elements of a virtual 
game world. Such game elements govern how the game proceeds of its 
own accord (e.g. evolving characters and storylines) as well as how it 
proceeds in interaction with the player(s) (e.g. tapping along with the game 
soundtrack to make your character dance if rhythms match). Given that 
these elements are conceptual in nature, they qualify, in a wider sense, as 
rules for playing games according to Art. 52(2)(c) (T 12/08). This holds true 
irrespective of the fact that they might be untold or revealed only while 
playing. 
If the claimed subject-matter specifies technical means for implementing 
game rules, it has a technical character. For example, when implementing 
the aforementioned condition of matching random numbers, the use of a 
computer calculating a pseudo-random sequence or of mechanical means 
such as cubic dice or uniformly sectored reels is sufficient to overcome an 
objection under Art. 52(2)(c) and (3). 
Inventive step of a claim comprising a mix of game rules and technical 
features is examined in accordance with the problem-solution approach for 
mixed-type inventions as set out under G-VII, 5.4. As a principle, inventive 
step cannot be established by the game rules themselves, irrespective of 
how original they may be, or by their mere automation. It must rather be 
based on further technical effects of a technical implementation of the 
game, i.e. technical effects that go beyond those already inherent to the 
rules. For example, a networked implementation of a game of chance like 
bingo, in which numbers physically drawn by an operator undergo a 
random mapping prior to transmission to remote players, makes a technical 
Art. 52(2)(c) 
Part G – Chapter II-12 

 
 
contribution since the scrambling of results has the technical effect of 
securing a data transmission, analogous to encryption, while having no 
bearing on the actual playing of the game. In contrast, a reduction of 
memory, network, or computational resources achieved by limiting the 
complexity of a game does not overcome a technical constraint by a 
technical solution. Rather than solving the technical problem of improving 
the efficiency of an implementation, such a limitation would at best 
circumvent it (G-VII, 5.4.1). Similarly, the commercial success of a game 
product resulting from simplified rules is an incidental effect without a direct 
technical cause. 
Inventive step of an implementation is to be assessed from the point of 
view of the skilled person, typically an engineer or a game programmer, 
who is tasked with implementing game rules as set by a game designer. 
Mere claim drafting exercises such as paraphrasing non-technical game 
elements ("win computation means" for monitoring the number of game 
tokens) or abstracting them ("objects" instead of "game tokens") using 
terms that are technical only on the surface have no bearing on inventive 
step. 
Game rules often are designed to entertain and keep the interest of players 
by way of psychological effects such as amusement, suspense, or surprise. 
Such effects do not qualify as technical effects. Similarly, giving rise to a 
balanced, fair or otherwise rewarding gameplay are psychological effects, 
not technical ones. Hence, rules and corresponding computations which 
determine a game score or a skill rating for players, even if computationally 
complex, are usually considered non-technical. 
Highly interactive gameplay such as in video games involves technical 
means for sensing user input, updating the game state and outputting 
visual, audio or haptic information. Features defining such presentations of 
information and user interfaces are assessed according to G-II, 3.7 and 
3.7.1. Cognitive content that informs the player about the current game 
state at a non-technical level, e.g. about a game score, the arrangement 
and suits of playing cards, the state and attributes of a game character is 
regarded as non-technical information. This equally holds for instructions 
presented on game boards or cards such as "go back to square one". An 
example of a technical context in which the manner of presenting 
information can make a technical contribution is the interactive control of 
real-time manoeuvres in a game world, the display of which is subject to 
conflicting technical requirements (T 928/03). 
Aside from rules, the state of a game world may also evolve in accordance 
with numerical data and equations that model physical principles or 
pseudo-physical behaviour, especially in video games. The systematic 
calculation of updates to such game states amounts to a computer-
implemented simulation based on these models (G 1/19). For the purpose 
of assessing inventive step in this context, the models are to be understood 
as defining a given constraint for a corresponding implementation on a 
computer (G-VII, 5.4). In contrast to effects that reside within the virtual 
game world or are otherwise inherent to the model already, a specific 
implementation of a simulation, if adapted to the internal functioning of a 
 

Part G – Chapter II-13 
 
computer system, produces a technical effect. For instance, merely 
predicting the virtual trajectory of a billiard ball shot by the player, even if 
highly accurate, fails to solve a technical problem beyond its 
implementation. In contrast, adjusting the step sizes used in the distributed 
simulation of bullets fired in a multi-player online game based on current 
network latencies produces a technical effect. 
Features which specify how to provide user input normally make a technical 
contribution (G-II, 3.7.1). However, a mapping of parameters obtained from 
known input mechanisms to parameters of a computer game qualifies as a 
game rule in a wider sense if it reflects the choice of the game designer, set 
for the purpose of defining the game or making it more interesting or 
challenging (e.g. a condition specifying that a slide gesture on a 
touchscreen determines both the power and the spin of a virtual golf shot). 
3.5.3 Schemes, rules and methods for doing business 
Subject-matter or activities which are of a financial, commercial, 
administrative or organisational nature fall within the scope of schemes, 
rules and methods for doing business, which are as such excluded from 
patentability under Art. 52(2)(c) and (3). In the rest of this section, any such 
subject-matter or activities will be subsumed under the term "business 
method". 
Financial activities typically include banking, billing or accounting. 
Marketing, advertising, licensing, management of rights and contractual 
agreements, as well as activities involving legal considerations, are of a 
commercial or administrative nature. Personnel management, designing a 
workflow for a business process or communicating postings to a target user 
community based on location information are examples of organisational 
rules. Other activities typical of doing business concern operational 
research, 
planning, 
forecasting 
and 
optimisations 
in 
business 
environments, including logistics and scheduling of tasks. These activities 
involve collecting information, setting goals, and using mathematical and 
statistical methods to evaluate the information for the purpose of facilitating 
managerial decision-making. 
If the claimed subject-matter specifies technical means, such as computers, 
computer networks or other programmable apparatus, for executing at least 
some steps of a business method, it is not limited to excluded 
subject-matter as such and thus not excluded from patentability under 
Art. 52(2)(c) and (3). 
However, the mere possibility of using technical means is not sufficient to 
avoid exclusion, even if the description discloses a technical embodiment 
(T 388/04, T 306/04, T 619/02). Terms like "system" or "means" are to be 
looked at carefully, because a "system" might e.g. refer to a financial 
organisation and "means" to organisational units if it cannot be inferred 
from the context that these terms refer exclusively to technical entities 
(T 154/04). 
Once it is established that the claimed subject-matter as a whole is not 
excluded from patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3), it is examined with 
Art. 52(2)(c) 
Part G – Chapter II-14 

 
 
respect to novelty and inventive step (G-I, 1). The examination of inventive 
step requires an assessment of which features contribute to the technical 
character of the invention (G-VII, 5.4). 
Where the claim specifies a technical implementation of a business 
method, the features which contribute to the technical character of the 
claim are in most cases limited to those specifying the particular technical 
implementation. 
Features which are the result of technical implementation choices and not 
part of the business method contribute to the technical character and thus 
have to be duly taken into account. This is illustrated with the following 
example: The claim defines a computerised networked system which 
allows customers to obtain audio-visual content about selected products 
using computers installed at each sales outlet of a company, all connected 
to a central server with a central database storing the audio-visual content 
as electronic files. The distribution of the electronic files from the central 
server to the sales outlets could be technically implemented either by 
enabling download of individual files directly from the central database to 
the computer on request of a customer or, alternatively, by transferring a 
plurality of selected electronic files to each sales outlet, storing these files in 
a local database of the sales outlet and retrieving the corresponding file 
from the local database when audio-visual content is requested by a 
customer at the sales outlet. Choosing one implementation among these 
two options lies within the competence of a technically skilled person, such 
as a software engineer, as opposed to, for example, specifying that the set 
of audio-visual contents offered is different for each sales outlet, which 
would typically be within the competence of a business expert. Features of 
the claim specifying any of these two possible technical implementations 
contribute to the technical character of the invention, whereas features 
specifying the business method do not. 
In the case of claims directed to a technical implementation of a business 
method, a modification to the underlying business method aimed at 
circumventing a technical problem, rather than addressing this problem in 
an inherently technical way, is not considered to make a technical 
contribution over the prior art. In the context of an automation of a business 
method, effects which are inherent in the business method do not qualify as 
technical effects (G-VII, 5.4.1). 
For instance, an automated accounting method that avoids redundant 
bookkeeping may be considered to require fewer computer resources in 
terms of computer workload and storage requirements. These advantages, 
in so far as they result from a reduction of the number of operations to be 
performed and the amount of data to be considered due to the business 
specification of the accounting method, are inherent to the accounting 
method itself and hence do not qualify as technical effects. 
Another example is based on an electronic auction that is performed by 
successively lowering the price until the price is fixed by the remote 
participant who first transmits a message. Since messages may be 
received out of order due to possible transmission delays, each message 
 

Part G – Chapter II-15 
 
contains timestamp information. Changing the auction rules to obviate the 
need for timestamp information amounts to circumventing the technical 
problem of transmission delays rather than solving it with technical means 
(T 258/03). As a further example, in a method for carrying out electronic 
financial transactions with credit cards at a point of sale, the administrative 
decision to dispense with the need to obtain the name or address of the 
buyer to authorise the transaction may result in saving time and reducing 
data traffic. However, this measure, on its own, is not a technical solution to 
the technical problem of the bandwidth bottleneck of communication lines 
and the limited capacity of server computers, but an administrative 
measure which does not contribute to the technical character of the claimed 
subject-matter. 
The mere fact that the input to a business method is real-world data is not 
sufficient for the business method to contribute to the technical character of 
the claimed subject-matter, even if the data relate to physical parameters 
(e.g. geographic distances between sales outlets) (T 154/04, T 1147/05, 
T 1029/06). See also G-II, 3.3. 
In 
a 
computer-implemented 
method 
for 
facilitating 
managerial 
decision-making, automatically selecting from a set of business plans the 
most cost-effective one which also enables meeting certain technical 
constraints (e.g. to achieve a targeted reduction in environmental impact) is 
not 
considered 
to 
make 
a 
technical 
contribution 
beyond 
the 
computer-implementation. 
The mere possibility of serving a technical purpose is not enough for a 
method to contribute to the technical character of the invention. For 
example, a claim to a "method of resource allocation in an industrial 
process" encompasses pure business processes and services in finance, 
administration, or management, without limiting the method to any specific 
technical process due to the breadth of meaning of the term "industry". 
The result of a business method may be useful, practical or saleable but 
that does not qualify as a technical effect. 
Business method features, e.g. administrative features, can be found in 
different contexts. For example, a medical support system may be 
configured to deliver information to the clinician on the basis of data 
obtained from patient sensors, and only if such data is not available, on the 
basis of data provided by the patient. The prioritisation of the sensor data 
over the data provided by the patient is an administrative rule. Establishing 
it lies within the competence of an administrator, e.g. the head of the clinic, 
rather than within that of an engineer. As an administrative rule with no 
technical effect, it does not contribute to the technical character of the 
claimed subject-matter and may be used in the formulation of the objective 
technical problem as a constraint that has to be met when assessing 
inventive step (G-VII, 5.4). For further examples of applying the 
problem-solution approach to assess inventive step for subject-matter 
comprising business-method features, see G-VII, 5.4.2.1-5.4.2.3. 
Part G – Chapter II-16 

 
 
3.6 Programs for computers 
Computer programs are excluded from patentability under Art. 52(2)(c) and 
(3) if claimed as such. However, following the generally applicable criteria 
for Art. 52(2) and (3) (G-II, 2), the exclusion does not apply to computer 
programs having a technical character. 
In order to have a technical character, and thus not be excluded from 
patentability, a computer program must produce a "further technical 
effect" when run on a computer. A "further technical effect" is a technical 
effect going beyond the "normal" physical interactions between the program 
(software) and the computer (hardware) on which it is run. The normal 
physical effects of the execution of a program, e.g. the circulation of 
electrical currents in the computer, are not in themselves sufficient to confer 
technical character to a computer program (T 1173/97 and G 3/08). 
Examples of further technical effects which confer technical character to a 
computer program are the control of a technical process or of the internal 
functioning of the computer itself or its interfaces (see G-II, 3.6.1). 
The presence of a further technical effect is assessed without reference to 
the prior art. It follows that the mere fact that a computer program serving a 
non-technical purpose requires less computing time than a prior-art 
program serving the same non-technical purpose does not on its own 
establish the presence of a further technical effect (T 1370/11). Likewise, 
comparing a computer program with how a human being would perform the 
same task is not a suitable basis for assessing if the computer program has 
a technical character (T 1358/09). 
If a further technical effect of the computer program has already been 
established, the computational efficiency of an algorithm affecting the 
established technical effect contributes to the technical character of the 
invention and thus to inventive step (e.g. where the design of the algorithm 
is motivated by technical considerations of the internal functioning of the 
computer; see also G-II, 3.3). 
A computer program cannot derive a technical character from the mere fact 
that it has been designed such that it can be automatically performed by a 
computer. "Further technical considerations", typically related to the 
technical considerations of the internal functioning of the computer, going 
beyond merely finding a computer algorithm to perform a task are needed. 
They have to be reflected in claimed features that cause a further technical 
effect (G 3/08). 
If a claim is directed to a computer program which does not have a 
technical character, it is objected to under Art. 52(2)(c) and (3). If it passes 
the test for having technical character, the examiner then proceeds to the 
questions of novelty and inventive step (see G-VI and G-VII, in particular 
G-VII, 5.4). 
Art. 52(2)(c) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-17 
 
Computer-implemented inventions 
"Computer-implemented invention" is an expression intended to cover 
claims which involve computers, computer networks or other programmable 
apparatus wherein at least one feature is realised by means of a computer 
program. Claims directed to computer-implemented inventions may take 
the forms described in F-IV, 3.9 and subsections. 
A computer program and a corresponding computer-implemented method 
are distinct from each other. The former refers to a sequence of 
computer-executable instructions specifying a method while the latter refers 
to a method being actually performed on a computer. 
Claims directed to a computer-implemented method, a computer-readable 
storage medium or a device cannot be objected to under Art. 52(2) and (3) 
as any method involving the use of technical means (e.g. a computer) and 
any technical means itself (e.g. a computer or a computer-readable storage 
medium) have technical character and thus represent inventions within the 
meaning of Art. 52(1) (T 258/03, T 424/03, G 3/08). 
3.6.1 Examples of further technical effects 
If a method has a technical character over and above the mere fact that it is 
computer-implemented, a corresponding computer program specifying that 
method produces a further technical effect when run on a computer. For 
example, a computer program which specifies a method of controlling an 
anti-lock braking system in a car, determining emissions by an X-ray 
device, compressing video, restoring a distorted digital image, or encrypting 
electronic communications brings about a further technical effect when it is 
run on a computer (see G-II, 3.3). 
Furthermore, if a computer program is designed based on specific technical 
considerations of the internal functioning of the computer on which it is to 
be executed, such as by being adapted to the specific architecture of the 
computer, it may be considered to produce a further technical effect. For 
example, computer programs implementing security measures for 
protecting boot integrity or countermeasures against power analysis attacks 
have a technical character since they rely on a technical understanding of 
the internal functioning of the computer. 
Similarly, computer programs controlling the internal functioning or 
operation of a computer, such as processor load balancing or memory 
allocation, normally produce a further technical effect (see, however, 
G-VII, 5.4.2.3 for an example of a case where the controlling is based on a 
non-technical scheme). 
Programs for processing code at low level, such as builders or compilers, 
may well have a technical character. For example, when building runtime 
objects from development objects, regenerating only those runtime objects 
resulting from modified development objects contributes to producing the 
further technical effect of limiting the resources needed for a particular 
build. 
Part G – Chapter II-18 

 
 
3.6.2 Information modelling, activity of programming and 
programming languages 
Information modelling is an intellectual activity devoid of technical 
character and typically carried out by a systems analyst in a first stage of 
software development, to provide a formal description of a real-world 
system or process. Consequently, specifications of a modelling language, 
the structure of an information modelling process (e.g. use of a template) or 
the maintenance of models likewise have no technical character (T 354/07). 
Similarly, properties inherent to information models, like re-usability, 
platform-independence or convenience for documentation, are not 
regarded as technical effects (T 1171/06). 
If an information model is purposively used in the context of an invention to 
solve a specific technical problem by providing a technical effect, it can 
contribute to the technical character of the invention (see also G-II, 3.3.2 
and 3.5.1). 
Features specifying how the model is actually stored (e.g. using relational 
database technology) can also make a technical contribution. 
Conceptual methods describing the process of software development 
(meta-methods) normally have no technical character. For example, in a 
computer-implemented method for generating program code for a control 
task, a feature specifying that a platform-independent model is converted to 
a platform-dependent model, from which program code adapted to the 
target platform is derived, makes no technical contribution in so far as the 
performance of the control task itself is not affected. 
The activity of programming, in the sense of writing code, is an 
intellectual, non-technical activity, to the extent that it is not used in the 
context of a concrete application or environment to contribute in a causal 
manner to the production of a technical effect (G 3/08, T 1539/09). 
For example, reading a data type parameter from a file as input to a 
computer program, rather than defining the data type in the program itself, 
is merely a programming option when writing code, which has per se no 
technical character. The same applies to naming conventions for object 
names for facilitating the intelligibility and the management of program 
code. 
Defining and providing a programming language or a programming 
paradigm such as object-oriented programming does not per se solve a 
technical problem, even if its particular syntax and semantics enable the 
programmer to develop a program with greater ease. Easing the intellectual 
effort of the programmer is per se not a technical effect. 
When assessing an invention relating to a programming environment, the 
features pertaining to the programming language do not normally contribute 
to its technical character. For example, in a visual programming 
environment, the provision of specific graphical building blocks is part of the 
programming language and makes no technical contribution if the only 
effect is easing the intellectual effort of the programmer. The provision of 
 

Part G – Chapter II-19 
 
particular programming constructs may enable a programmer to write 
shorter programs, but that does not qualify as a technical effect since any 
resulting reduction of program length ultimately depends on how the 
programming constructs are used by a human programmer. In contrast, 
automatically processing machine code by dividing it into an instruction 
chain and an operand chain and replacing repeating instruction sets by 
macro-instructions so as to generate optimised code of reduced memory 
size makes a technical contribution. In this case, the effect does not 
depend on how a human programmer makes use of the macro-instructions. 
Features of a programming environment that relate to its graphical user 
interface, e.g. visualisations and data input mechanisms, are to be 
assessed as indicated in G-II, 3.7 and 3.7.1. 
3.6.3 Data retrieval, formats and structures 
A computer-implemented data structure or data format embodied on a 
medium or as an electromagnetic carrier wave has technical character as a 
whole and thus is an invention within the meaning of Art. 52(1). 
A data structure or format contributes to the technical character of the 
invention if it has an intended technical use and it causes a technical effect 
when used according to this intended technical use. Such a potential 
technical effect related to an implied technical use is to be taken into 
account in assessing inventive step (G 1/19). This may happen if the data 
structure or format is functional data, i.e. if it has a technical function in a 
technical system, such as controlling the operation of the device processing 
the data. Functional data inherently comprise, or map to, the corresponding 
technical features of the device (T 1194/97). Cognitive data, on the other 
hand, are those data whose content and meaning are only relevant to 
human users and do not contribute to producing a technical effect (see 
however, G-II, 3.7 for presentation of information to a user in a continued 
and/or guided human-machine interaction process). 
For example, a record carrier for use in a picture retrieval system stores 
coded pictures together with a data structure defined in terms of line 
numbers and addresses which instruct the system how to decode and 
access the picture from the record carrier. This data structure is defined in 
terms which inherently comprise the technical features of the picture 
retrieval system, namely the record carrier and a reading device for 
retrieving pictures therefrom in which the record carrier is operative. It thus 
contributes to the technical character of the record carrier, whereas the 
cognitive content of the stored pictures (e.g. photograph of a person or 
landscape) does not. 
Similarly, an index structure used for searching a record in a database 
produces a technical effect since it controls the way the computer performs 
the search operation (T 1351/04). 
Another example is an electronic message with a header and a content 
section. Information in the header comprises instructions which are 
automatically recognised and processed by the receiving message system. 
This processing in turn determines how the content elements are to be 
Part G – Chapter II-20 

 
 
assembled and presented to its final recipient. The provision of such 
instructions in the header contributes to the technical character of the 
electronic message, whereas the information in the content section, 
representing cognitive data, does not (T 858/02). 
A data structure or a data format may have features which may not be 
characterised as cognitive data (i.e. not for conveying information to a user) 
but which nevertheless do not make a technical contribution. For example, 
the structure of a computer program may merely aim at facilitating the task 
of the programmer, which is not a technical effect serving a technical 
purpose. Furthermore, data models and other information models at an 
abstract logical level have per se no technical character (see G-II, 3.6.2). 
Digital data is used to control devices in additive manufacturing (AM), which 
is the general term for technologies manufacturing physical objects by 
successive addition of material based on a digital representation of the 
geometry of the object. If the data defines the instructions for operating the 
AM device, it makes a technical contribution as illustrated in the following 
example: 
Example 
A computer-readable medium storing data which defines both a digital 
representation of the product of claim 1 and operating instructions adapted 
to control an AM device to fabricate the product using the digital 
representation of the product when said data is relayed to the AM device. 
Remarks 
A computer-readable medium is a technical object, so no objection under 
Art. 52(2) and (3) arises.  
Since the data comprises both a digital description of the (physical) product 
of claim 1 and associated operating instructions adapted to control an AM 
device, it is intended to be used to control an AM device to fabricate the 
product. This technical use of the data is implied across substantially the 
whole scope of the claim. Construing the present claim to encompass a 
non-technical use of merely visualising the data would be artificial. The 
technical effect of fabricating the physical product defined in claim 1 that is 
achieved when the data is used according to its intended use is thus a 
potential technical effect that is to be taken into account when assessing 
inventive step. The digital representation of the product makes a technical 
contribution to the extent that it defines technical features of the fabricated 
physical product. 
However, if such a technical use of the data were not implied by the claim, 
the potential technical effect of the data of fabricating the physical product 
could not be taken into account when assessing inventive step as it would 
not be implied across substantially the whole scope of the claim. This would 
be the case, for instance, if the data defined only a digital description or 3D 
model of the product that is not adapted to additive manufacturing of the 
product and could be used to merely visualise the product in a CAD 
 

Part G – Chapter II-21 
 
software tool. Abstract descriptions or models are not considered technical 
even if the described entities are technical (see G-II, 3.3.2). In such a case, 
the stored non-technical data would not make a technical contribution. 
3.6.4 Database management systems and information retrieval 
Database management systems are technical systems implemented on 
computers to perform the technical tasks of storing and retrieving data 
using various data structures for efficient management of data. A method 
performed in a database management system is thus a method which uses 
technical means and is therefore not excluded from patentability under 
Art. 52(2) and Art. 52(3). 
Features specifying the internal functioning of a database management 
system are normally based on technical considerations. Therefore, they 
contribute to the technical character of the invention and are taken into 
account for the assessment of inventive step. For instance, technical 
considerations are involved in improving system throughput and query 
response times by automatically managing data using various data stores 
with different technical properties such as different levels of consistency or 
performance (T 1924/17, T 697/17). 
Database management systems execute structured queries, which formally 
and precisely describe the data to be retrieved. Optimising the execution of 
such structured queries with respect to the computer resources needed 
(such as CPU, main memory or hard disk) contributes to the technical 
character of the invention since it involves technical considerations 
concerning the efficient exploitation of the computer system. 
However, not all features implemented in a database management system 
necessarily make a technical contribution by virtue of this fact alone. For 
example, a feature of a database management system for accounting costs 
related to the use of the system by different users may be regarded as not 
making a technical contribution. 
Data structures, such as an index, hash table or a query tree, used in 
database management systems to facilitate access to data or for the 
execution of structured queries contribute to the technical character of the 
invention. Such data structures are functional since they purposively control 
the operation of the database management system to perform said 
technical tasks. Conversely, data structures defined solely by the cognitive 
information they store are not considered to contribute to the technical 
character of the invention beyond the mere storage of data (see also 
G-II, 3.6.3). 
A distinction is made between executing structured queries by a database 
management system and information retrieval. The latter includes 
searching for information in a document, searching for documents 
themselves, and also searching for metadata that describe data such as 
texts, images or sounds. The query may be formulated by the user in need 
of information, typically informally using natural language without a precise 
format: the user may enter search terms as a query in web search engines 
to find relevant documents or submit an exemplary document to find similar 
Part G – Chapter II-22 

 
 
documents. If the method of estimating relevance or similarity relies solely 
on non-technical considerations, such as the cognitive content of the items 
to be retrieved, purely linguistic rules or other subjective criteria (e.g. items 
found relevant by friends in social networks), it does not make a technical 
contribution. 
The translation of linguistic considerations into a mathematical model with 
the aim of enabling the linguistic analysis to be done automatically by a 
computer can be seen as involving, at least implicitly, technical 
considerations. However, this is not enough to guarantee the technical 
character of the mathematical model. Further technical considerations such 
as those relating to the internal functioning of the computer system are 
needed. 
For example, a mathematical model for calculating the probability that a 
given term is similar in meaning to another term by analysing the 
co-occurrence frequency of the two terms in a collection of documents does 
not make a technical contribution per se since it is based on considerations 
of a purely linguistic nature (i.e. based on the assumption that terms which 
are related are more likely than unrelated terms to occur in the same 
documents). The search results produced using this method of similarity 
calculation would differ from prior art that adopts another mathematical 
model only in that information with different cognitive content would be 
retrieved. This is a non-technical distinction and does not qualify as a 
technical effect. In this context of retrieval based on similarity of meaning of 
terms, the concept of "better search" is subjective (T 598/14). In contrast, 
optimising the execution time of structured queries in a database 
management system as discussed above is a technical effect. 
See also G-II, 3.3.1, for artificial intelligence and machine learning 
algorithms. 
3.7 Presentations of information 
Presentations of information within the meaning of Art. 52(2)(d) are 
understood as the conveying of information to a user. It concerns both the 
cognitive content of the information presented and the manner of its 
presentation (T 1143/06, T 1741/08). It is not limited to visual information, 
but also covers other presentation modalities, e.g. audio or haptic 
information. However, it does not extend to the technical means used for 
generating such presentations of information. 
Furthermore, conveying information to a user is to be distinguished from 
technical representations of information directed to a technical system 
which will process, store or transmit that information. Features of data 
encoding schemes, data structures and electronic communication protocols 
which represent functional data as opposed to cognitive data are not 
regarded as presentations of information within the meaning of Art. 52(2)(d) 
(T 1194/97). 
When assessing exclusion from patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3), the 
claimed subject-matter has to be considered as a whole (G-II, 2). In 
particular, a claim directed to or specifying the use of any technical means 
Art. 52(2)(d) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-23 
 
for presenting information (e.g. a computer display) has, as a whole, 
technical character and is thus not excluded from patentability. As another 
example, a claim directed to a kit comprising a product (e.g. a bleaching 
composition) and further features such as instructions for use of the product 
or reference information for evaluating the results obtained, wherein said 
further features have no technical effect on the product, is not excluded 
since the claim has a technical feature: a product comprising a composition 
of matter. 
Once it is established that the claimed subject-matter as a whole is not 
excluded from patentability under Art. 52(2) and (3), it is examined in 
respect of the other requirements of patentability, in particular novelty and 
inventive step (G-I, 1). 
During the assessment of inventive step, features related to the 
presentation of information are analysed to determine if, in the context of 
the invention, they contribute to producing a technical effect serving a 
technical purpose. If not, they make no technical contribution and cannot 
support the presence of an inventive step (G-VII, 5.4). To determine 
whether a technical effect is produced, the examiner assesses the context 
of the invention, the task the user carries out and the actual purpose served 
by the particular presentation of information. 
A feature defining a presentation of information produces a technical effect 
if it credibly assists the user in performing a technical task by means of a 
continued and/or guided human-machine interaction process (T 336/14 and 
T 1802/13). Such a technical effect is considered credibly achieved if the 
assistance to the user in performing the technical task is objectively, 
reliably and causally linked to the feature. This would not be the case if the 
alleged effect depends on subjective interests or preferences of the user. 
For example, for some users it is easier to understand data when it is 
displayed as numerical values, whereas others might prefer a colour-coded 
display. The choice of the one or other manner of displaying the data is 
thus not considered to have a technical effect (T 1567/05). Similarly, 
whether or not it is easier to understand audio information conveyed as a 
musical scale instead of spoken words is a matter concerned only with the 
cognitive abilities of the user. As another example, allowing the user to set 
parameters determining the information to be presented or to select the 
manner of its presentation does not make a technical contribution if it 
merely accommodates subjective user preferences. 
Determining the extent to which a particular presentation of information 
may be considered to credibly support the user in performing a technical 
task may be difficult. It may be simplified during the assessment of 
inventive step by comparing the invention with the prior art, thus allowing 
the analysis to be limited to the distinguishing features (G-VII, 5.4, 
paragraph 5). This comparison may reveal that the potential support for the 
performance of the technical task is already achieved in the prior art, with 
the consequence that the distinguishing features make no technical 
contribution (e.g. relate only to non-technical subjective user preferences). 
Part G – Chapter II-24 

 
 
A feature relating to the presentation of information may commonly be 
considered to specify: 
(i) 
the cognitive content of the information presented, i.e. defining "what" 
is presented; or 
(ii) 
the manner in which the information is presented, i.e. defining "how" 
the information is presented. 
This categorisation is adopted to allow for a more detailed discussion of 
technical effects in the rest of this section. It is noted that these categories 
are not meant to be exhaustive. Also, there are cases in which a feature 
falls into both categories. For example, a step of "displaying the surname of 
a customer in capital letters" in a claimed method defines both the cognitive 
content of the presented information (surname of a customer) and the 
manner of its presentation (in capital letters). Such a feature may be 
considered to consist in fact of two features: the displayed text is the 
surname of a customer (falling into the first category) and the displayed text 
is shown in capital letters (falling into the second category). The manner of 
presentation itself might additionally convey cognitive information. For 
example, the capitalised part of a name may, as a matter of convention, 
indicate which part is the surname. 
(1) 
What (which information) is presented? 
If the cognitive content of the information presented to the user relates to 
an internal state prevailing in a technical system and enables the user to 
properly operate this technical system, it has a technical effect. An internal 
state prevailing in a technical system is an operating mode, a technical 
condition or an event which is related to the internal functioning of the 
system, may dynamically change and is automatically detected. Its 
presentation typically prompts the user to interact with the system, for 
example to avoid technical malfunctions (T 528/07). 
Static or predetermined information about technical properties or potential 
states of a machine, specifications of a device or operating instructions do 
not qualify as an internal state prevailing in the device. If the presentation of 
static or predetermined information merely has the effect of helping the 
user with the non-technical tasks preceding the technical task, it does not 
make a technical contribution. For example, the effect that the user is not 
required to know or memorise a sequence of buttons to be operated prior to 
configuring a device is not a technical effect. 
Non-technical information such as the state of a casino game, a business 
process or an abstract simulation model is exclusively aimed at the user for 
subjective evaluation or non-technical decision-making. It is not directly 
linked to a technical task. Therefore, such information does not qualify as 
an internal state prevailing in a technical system. 
 

Part G – Chapter II-25 
 
(2) 
How is the information presented? 
A feature in this category typically specifies the form or arrangement in 
which, or the timing at which, information is conveyed to the user (e.g. on a 
screen). One example is a diagram designed solely for conveying 
information. Specific technical features related to, for example, the way 
audio signals or images are generated are not regarded as a manner in 
which information is presented. 
Features defining a visualisation of information in a particular diagram or 
layout are normally not considered to make a technical contribution, even if 
the diagram or layout arguably conveys information in a way which a viewer 
may intuitively regard as particularly appealing, lucid or logical. 
For instance, dealing with limited available screen space is part of 
designing presentations of information for human viewing and therefore not 
an indication of technicality per se. The general idea of giving an overview 
of a plurality of images in a limited display area by displaying a single 
image and sequentially replacing it with other images is not based on 
technical considerations, but is a matter of layout design. Similarly, 
arranging objects within available screen space by eliminating "white 
space" between window panes follows the same layout principles as would 
apply to the layout of a magazine cover and does not involve technical 
considerations. 
On the other hand, if the manner of presentation credibly assists the user in 
performing a technical task by means of a continued and/or guided 
human-machine interaction process, it produces a technical effect 
(T 1143/06, T 1741/08, T 1802/13). For example, displaying several images 
side by side in low resolution and allowing selection and display of an 
image at higher resolution conveys information to the user in the form of a 
technical tool that enables the user to perform the technical task of 
interactively searching and retrieving stored images more efficiently. 
Storing digital images at different resolutions gives rise to the technical 
effect of allowing the simultaneous overview display of several images 
(T 643/00). As another example, in a video soccer game, the particular 
manner of conveying to the user the location of the nearest teammate by 
dynamically displaying a guide mark on the edge of the screen when the 
teammate is off-screen produces the technical effect of facilitating a 
continued human-machine interaction by resolving conflicting technical 
requirements: displaying an enlarged portion of an image and maintaining 
an overview of a zone of interest which is larger than the display area 
(T 928/03). As a further example, in the context of a visual aid for a 
surgeon, if, in the course of surgery, the current orientation of a medical ball 
joint implant is displayed in a manner which credibly assists the surgeon to 
correct the position of the implant in a more precise manner, this is 
considered to provide a technical effect. 
Effects relying on human physiology 
When a manner of presenting information produces in the mind of the user 
an effect which does not depend on psychological or other subjective 
Part G – Chapter II-26 

 
 
factors but on physical parameters which are based on human physiology 
and can be precisely defined, that effect may qualify as a technical effect. 
The manner of presenting information then makes a technical contribution 
to the extent that it contributes to this technical effect. For example, 
displaying a notification on one of a plurality of computer screens near the 
user's current visual focus of attention has the technical effect that it is 
more or less guaranteed to be seen immediately (compared e.g. with an 
arbitrary placement on one of the screens). In contrast, the decision to 
show only urgent notifications (compared e.g. to all notifications) is based 
only on psychological factors and thus makes no technical contribution. 
Minimising information overload and distraction is not considered to qualify 
per se as a technical effect (T 862/10). As another example, displaying a 
stream of images in which the parameters for delay and change in the 
content between successive images are computed on the basis of physical 
properties of human visual perception in order to achieve a smooth 
transition is considered to make a technical contribution (T 509/07). 
If information (e.g. a visual or audio stimulus) is presented to a person for 
the purpose of producing in that person a physiological reaction 
(e.g. involuntary eye gaze) which can be measured in the context of 
assessing a medical condition (e.g. eyesight, hearing impairment or brain 
damage), that presentation of information may be considered to produce a 
technical effect. 
Effects relying on mental activities of the user 
Where the claimed subject-matter comprises a feature of presenting 
information to a user, be it of category (i) or (ii), an evaluation by the user is 
involved. Although such an evaluation per se is a mental act (Art. 52(2)(c)), 
the mere fact that mental activities are involved does not necessarily qualify 
subject-matter as non-technical. For example, in T 643/00 discussed 
above, the user makes an evaluation based on an overview of 
low-resolution images in order to locate and objectively recognise a desired 
image. This mental evaluation may be considered to be an intermediate 
step steering the image search and retrieval process and thus forms an 
integral part of a solution to a technical problem. Such a solution relies 
neither on facilitating the human tasks of understanding, learning, reading 
or memorising nor on influencing the user's decision as to which image is to 
be searched. It provides a mechanism for inputting a selection which would 
not be possible if the images were not displayed in that specific 
arrangement. 
On the other hand, if the choice or layout of information presented aims 
exclusively at the human mind, in particular to help the user to take a 
non-technical decision (e.g. which product to buy based on a diagram 
showing properties of products), no technical contribution is made. 
3.7.1 User interfaces 
User interfaces, in particular graphical user interfaces (GUIs), comprise 
features of presenting information and receiving input in response as part of 
human-computer interaction. Features defining user input are more likely to 
have a technical character than those solely concerning data output and 
 

Part G – Chapter II-27 
 
display, because input requires compatibility with the predetermined 
protocol of a machine, whereas output may be largely dictated by the 
subjective preferences of a user. Features concerning the graphic design of 
a menu (such as its look and feel) which are determined by aesthetic 
considerations, subjective user preferences or administrative rules do not 
contribute to the technical character of a menu-based user interface. 
Evaluation of features related to output of data is addressed in G-II, 3.6.3. 
The present section focuses on evaluating features relating to how a user 
can provide input. 
Features which specify a mechanism enabling user input, such as entering 
text, making a selection or submitting a command, are normally considered 
to make a technical contribution. For example, providing in a GUI an 
alternative graphical shortcut allowing the user to directly set different 
processing conditions, such as initiating a printing process and setting the 
number of copies to be printed by dragging and reciprocated movement of 
a document icon onto a printer icon, makes a technical contribution. On the 
other hand, supporting user input by providing information facilitating only 
the user's mental decision-making process during this task (e.g. helping the 
user in deciding what to input) is not considered as making a technical 
contribution (T 1741/08). 
Assisting a user in entering text in a computer system by providing a 
predictive input mechanism is a technical function. However, generating 
word variants to be displayed for the predictive input mechanism is, in itself, 
a non-technical problem. The linguistic model used to solve this 
non-technical problem does not, on its own, make a technical contribution. 
If technical considerations are involved to implement the linguistic model on 
a computer, such as those relating to the internal functioning of a computer, 
then a technical effect may arise. 
Where the actual achievement of effects like simplifying the user's actions 
or providing more user-convenient input functions depends exclusively on 
subjective user abilities or preferences, such effects may not form the basis 
of an objective technical problem to be solved. For example, a reduction of 
the number of interactions required to perform the same input is not 
credibly achieved if it materialises only for some usage patterns that occur 
depending on the user's level of expertise or subjective preferences. 
Manners of providing input, such as gestures or keystrokes, that merely 
reflect subjective user preferences, conventions or game rules and from 
which a physical ergonomic advantage cannot be objectively established, 
do not make a technical contribution. However, performance-oriented 
improvements to the detection of input, such as allowing faster or more 
accurate gesture recognition or reducing the processing load of the device 
when performing recognition, do make a technical contribution. 
4. Exceptions to patentability 
4.1 Matter contrary to "ordre public" or morality 
Any invention the commercial exploitation of which would be contrary to 
"ordre public" or morality is specifically excluded from patentability. The 
Art. 53(a) 
Part G – Chapter II-28 

 
 
purpose of this is to deny protection to inventions likely to induce riot or 
public disorder, or to lead to criminal or other generally offensive behaviour 
(see also F-II, 7.2). Antipersonnel mines are an obvious example. 
Examples in the area of biotechnological inventions as laid down in Rule 28 
are listed in G-II, 5.3. G 1/03 explains that practical examples under 
Art. 53(a) arise from the fact that not everything can be done to human 
beings that can be done to other living beings. For example, the avoidance 
of offspring that are unwanted because of certain properties (sex, colour, 
health) and for economic reasons may be quite legitimate for domestic 
animals but when applied to human beings it would be contrary to "ordre 
public" or morality. 
This provision is likely to be invoked only in rare and extreme cases. A fair 
test to apply is to consider whether it is probable that the public in general 
would regard the invention as so abhorrent that the grant of patent rights 
would be inconceivable. If it is clear that this is the case, an objection is 
raised under Art. 53(a); otherwise not. The mere possibility of abuse of an 
invention is not sufficient to deny patent protection pursuant to Art. 53(a) 
EPC if the invention can also be exploited in a way which does not and 
would not infringe "ordre public" and morality (see T 866/01). If difficult legal 
questions arise in this context, then refer to C-VIII, 7. 
Where it is found that the claims relate in part to such excluded 
subject-matter, this may have led to the issuing of a partial European or 
supplementary European search report under Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 1, 3.1 
and 3.2). In such cases, in the absence of appropriate amendment and/or 
convincing arguments provided by the applicant in response to the 
invitation under Rule 63(1) (see B-VIII, 3.2) or to the search opinion under 
Rule 70a (see B-XI, 8), an objection under Rule 63(3) will also arise 
(see H-II, 5).  
4.1.1 Prohibited matter 
Exploitation is not to be deemed to be contrary to "ordre public" or morality 
merely because it is prohibited by law or regulation in some or all of the 
contracting states. One reason for this is that a product could still be 
manufactured under a European patent for export to states in which its use 
is not prohibited. 
4.1.2 Offensive and non-offensive use 
Special attention must be paid to applications in which the invention has 
both an offensive and a non-offensive use, e.g. a process for breaking open 
locked safes, where use by a burglar is offensive and use by a locksmith in 
an emergency non-offensive. In such a case, no objection arises under 
Art. 53(a). Similarly, if a claimed invention defines a copying machine with 
features resulting in an improved precision of reproduction and an 
embodiment of this apparatus could comprise further features (not claimed 
but apparent to the skilled person) the only purpose of which would be that 
it also allows reproduction of security strips in banknotes strikingly similar to 
those in genuine banknotes, the claimed apparatus would cover an 
embodiment for producing counterfeit money which could be considered to 
fall under Art. 53(a). There is, however, no reason to consider the copying 
machine as claimed to be excluded from patentability, since its improved 
Art. 53(a) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-29 
 
properties could be used for many acceptable purposes (see G 1/98, 
Reasons 3.3.3). However, if the application contains an explicit reference to 
a use which is contrary to "ordre public" or morality, deletion of this 
reference is required under the terms of Rule 48(1)(a). 
4.1.3 Economic effects 
The EPO has not been vested with the task of taking into account the 
economic effects of the grant of patents in specific areas of technology and 
of restricting the field of patentable subject-matter accordingly (see G 1/98 
Reasons 3.9, and T 1213/05). The standard to apply for an exception under 
Art. 53(a) is whether the commercial exploitation of the invention is contrary 
to "ordre public" or morality. 
4.2 Surgery, therapy and diagnostic methods 
European patents are not to be granted in respect of "methods for 
treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy and 
diagnostic methods practised on the human or animal body; this provision 
shall not apply to products, in particular substances or compositions, for 
use in any of these methods." Hence, patents may be obtained for surgical, 
therapeutic or diagnostic instruments or apparatuses for use in such 
methods. The manufacture of prostheses or artificial limbs could be 
patentable. For instance, a method of manufacturing insoles in order to 
correct the posture or a method of manufacturing an artificial limb is 
patentable. In both cases, taking the imprint of the footplate or a moulding 
of the stump on which an artificial limb is fitted is clearly not of a surgical 
nature. Furthermore, the insoles as well as the artificial limb are 
manufactured outside the body. However, a method of manufacturing an 
endoprosthesis outside the body, but requiring a surgical step to be carried 
out for taking measurements, would be excluded from patentability under 
Art. 53(c) (see T 1005/98). 
The exception under Art. 53(c) does not extend to products, particularly 
substances or compositions, for use in these methods of treatment or 
diagnosis. 
Where a substance or composition is already known, (notional) novelty can 
be derived from a new medical use in accordance with Art. 54(4) and (5). 
Pursuant to Art. 54(4), a known substance or composition may still be 
patented for use in a method referred to in Art. 53(c) if the known 
substance or composition has not previously been disclosed for use for any 
such method ("first medical use"). A claim to a known substance or 
composition for the first use in surgical, therapeutic and/or diagnostic 
methods must be in a form such as: "Substance or composition X" followed 
by the indication of the use, for instance "... for use as a medicament" or "... 
for use in therapy/in vivo diagnostics/surgery" (see G-VI, 6.1). 
Furthermore, if the known substance or composition was previously 
disclosed for use in surgery, therapy or diagnostic methods practised on 
the human or animal body, a patent may still be obtained according to 
Art. 54(5) for any second or further use of the substance in these methods 
provided that said use is novel and inventive ("further medical use"). A 
Art. 53(c) 
Art. 54(4) 
Art. 54(5) 
Part G – Chapter II-30 

 
 
claim to a further medical use of a known substance must be in the form: 
"Substance or composition X" followed by the indication of the specific 
therapeutical/in vivo diagnostic/surgical use, for instance, "... for use in 
treating disease Y" (see G-VI, 6.1). 
Subject-matter in the description regarded as an exception to patentability 
needs to be excised, reworded such that it does not fall under the 
exceptions to patentability or prominently marked as not being according to 
the claimed invention (see F-IV, 4.3). For the latter case, in accordance 
with Art. 53(c), the description may for example be amended by adding an 
indication as follows: "The references to the methods of treatment by 
therapy or surgery or in vivo diagnosis methods in examples X, Y and Z of 
this description are to be interpreted as references to compounds, 
pharmaceutical compositions and medicaments of the present invention for 
use in those methods". 
4.2.1 Limitations of exception under Art. 53(c) 
Exceptions under Art. 53(c) are confined to methods for treatment of the 
human or animal body by surgery or therapy and diagnostic methods 
practised on the human or animal body. It follows that other methods of 
treatment of living human beings or animals (e.g. treatment of a sheep in 
order to promote growth, to improve the quality of mutton or to increase the 
yield of wool) or other methods of measuring or recording characteristics of 
the human or animal body are patentable, provided that such methods are 
of a technical and not essentially biological character (see G-II, 5.4.2). For 
example, an application containing claims directed to the purely cosmetic 
treatment of a human by administration of a chemical product is considered 
as being patentable (see T 144/83). A cosmetic treatment involving surgery 
or therapy would, however, not be patentable (see below). 
To be excluded from patentability, a treatment or diagnostic method must 
actually be carried out on the living human or animal body (G 1/04). A 
treatment of or diagnostic method practised on a dead human or animal 
body would therefore not be excluded from patentability by virtue of 
Art. 53(c). Treatment of body tissues or fluids after they have been 
removed from the human or animal body, or diagnostic methods applied 
thereon, are not excluded from patentability as long as these tissues or 
fluids are not returned to the same body. Thus the treatment of blood for 
storage in a blood bank or diagnostic testing of blood samples is not 
excluded, whereas a treatment of blood by dialysis with the blood being 
returned to the same body would be excluded. 
Regarding methods which are carried out on or in relation to the living 
human or animal body, it must be borne in mind that the intention of 
Art. 53(c) is only to free from restraint non-commercial and non-industrial 
medical and veterinary activities. Interpretation of the provision must avoid 
the exceptions from going beyond their proper limits (see G 5/83, G 1/04, 
and G 1/07). 
Whether or not a method is excluded from patentability under Art. 53(c) 
cannot depend on the person carrying it out (see G 1/04 and G 1/07, 
Reasons 3.4.1). 
Art. 53(c) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-31 
 
However, in contrast to the subject-matter referred to in Art. 52(2) and (3) 
which is only excluded from patentability if claimed as such, a method claim 
is not allowable under Art. 53(c) if it includes at least one feature defining a 
physical activity or action that constitutes a method step for treatment of the 
human or animal body by surgery or therapy. In that case, whether or not 
the claim includes or consists of features directed to a technical operation 
performed on a technical object is legally irrelevant to the application of 
Art. 53(c) (see G 1/07, Reasons 3.2.5). 
Claims to medical devices, computer programs and storage media which 
comprise subject-matter corresponding to that of a method for treatment of 
the human or animal body by surgery or therapy or to that of a diagnostic 
method practised on the human or animal body are not to be objected to 
under Art. 53(c), because only method claims may fall under the exception 
of Art. 53(c). 
4.2.1.1 Surgery 
The meaning of the term "treatment by surgery" is not to be interpreted as 
being confined to surgical methods pursuing a therapeutic purpose (see 
G 1/07, Reasons 3.3.10). Accordingly, the term "surgery" defines the nature 
of the treatment rather than its purpose. Thus, for example, a method of 
treatment by surgery for cosmetic purposes or for embryo transfer is 
excluded from patentability, as well as surgical treatment for therapeutic 
purposes. The term "treatments by surgery" further covers interventions 
performed on the structure of an organism by conservative ("closed, 
non-invasive") procedures such as repositioning or by operative (invasive) 
procedures using instruments. 
Whether a claimed method is to be considered as surgical treatment falling 
under the exception of Art. 53(c) should be assessed on a case-by-case 
basis, taking the individual merits of each case into account. The reason for 
the exception is to allow medical and veterinary practitioners to use their 
skills and knowledge of the best available treatments to achieve the utmost 
benefit for their patients uninhibited by any worry that some treatment might 
be covered by a patent (see G 1/07, Reasons 3.3.6). 
Thus, any definition of the term "treatment by surgery" must cover the kind 
of interventions which constitute the core of the medical profession's 
activities i.e. the kind of interventions for which their members are 
specifically trained and for which they assume a particular responsibility 
(G 1/07, Reasons 3.4.2.3). 
The exclusion applies to substantial physical interventions on the body 
which require professional medical expertise to be carried out and which 
entail a substantial health risk even when carried out with the required 
professional care and expertise. The health risk must be associated with 
the mode of administration and not solely with the agent as such (G 1/07, 
Reasons 3.4.2.3). Examples of excluded treatments by surgery are the 
injection of a contrast agent into the heart, catheterisation and endoscopy. 
Invasive techniques of a routine character which are performed on 
uncritical body parts and generally carried out in a non-medical, commercial 
Part G – Chapter II-32 

 
 
environment 
are 
not 
excluded 
from 
patentability. 
They 
include 
e.g. tattooing, piercing, hair removal by optical radiation and micro-abrasion 
of the skin. 
Similar considerations apply to routine interventions in the medical field. 
Thus, uncritical methods involving only a minor intervention and no 
substantial health risks, when carried out with the required care and skill, 
do not fall under the scope of Art. 53(c). This narrower understanding of the 
exclusion still protects the medical profession from the concerns indicated 
above. An example is a method for retraction of the sulcus of a tooth using 
a paste and a cap to prepare an impression of the tooth to manufacture a 
dental crown: the possible damage is limited to the superficial epithelium, 
the only risks are the superficial bleeding and inflammation which rapidly 
heal and the specific training needed to perform the method is minimal. 
The required medical expertise and the health risk involved may however 
not be the only criteria which may be used to determine that a claimed 
method actually constitutes "treatment by surgery" within the meaning of 
Art. 53(c). Other criteria, such as the degree of invasiveness or the 
complexity of the operation performed, could also determine that a physical 
intervention on the human or animal body constitutes such treatment 
(see G 1/07, Reasons 3.4.2.4). 
The exclusion under Art. 53(c) applies to multi-step methods which 
comprise or encompass at least one surgical step, as defined in the 
previous paragraph. The non-patentable subject-matter must be removed 
from the scope of the claim. This may be done either by means of a 
disclaimer or by omitting the surgical step from the wording of the claim 
(G 1/07, Reasons 4.2.2). For the general principles governing disclaimers, 
see H-V, 4. The overall patentability of the amended claim will however 
depend on its compliance with the other requirements of the EPC, which 
are assessed on a case-by-case basis. 
If a surgical method claim is open to objection under Art. 53(c), this also 
applies to a corresponding claim directed to a computer-assisted surgical 
method. In other words, surgical methods for which European patents 
cannot be granted according to Art. 53(c) do not avoid exclusion merely 
through computer assistance. 
Finally, when interpreting the scope of the exclusion under Art. 53(c), no 
distinction is to be made between human beings and animals. 
4.2.1.2 Therapy 
Therapy implies the curing of a disease or malfunction of the body and 
covers prophylactic treatment, e.g. immunisation against a certain disease 
(see T 19/86) or the removal of plaque (see T 290/86). It is concerned with 
bringing the body from a pathological state back into its normal, healthy 
state or preventing a pathological state. Where a method is directed to the 
treatment of a human or animal body that is in a normal, healthy state and, 
even if subject to some discomfort, not likely to develop a pathological state 
due to the discomfort, providing relief from the discomfort is not necessarily 
a therapy. For example, cooling an animal subject to hot weather conditions 
 

Part G – Chapter II-33 
 
does not cure or lessen the symptoms of any disorder or malfunction of the 
animal's body, nor does it reduce the possibility of contracting any disorder 
or malfunction, since no such disorder or malfunction would normally occur 
if the animal were not cooled (T 385/09). 
A method for therapeutic purposes concerning the functioning of an 
apparatus associated with a living human or animal body is not excluded 
from patentability if no functional relationship exists between the steps 
related to the apparatus and the therapeutic effect of the apparatus on the 
body (see T 245/87). 
As clinical trials have a therapeutic aspect for the human subjects 
undergoing them, an objection under Art. 53(c) is raised if a claim includes 
a step relating to a method of treatment of the human body by therapy 
(see G-II, 4.2.2). 
The exclusion under Art. 53(c) applies to multi-step methods which 
comprise or encompass at least one therapeutic step. The non-patentable 
subject-matter must be removed from the scope of the claim. This may be 
done either by means of a disclaimer or by omitting the step of treatment by 
therapy from the wording of the claim (G 1/07). For the general principles 
governing disclaimers, see H-V, 4. The overall patentability of the amended 
claim will however depend on its compliance with the other requirements of 
the EPC, which are assessed on a case-by-case basis. 
If a method claim directed to therapy is open to objection under Art. 53(c), 
this 
also 
applies 
to 
a 
corresponding 
claim 
directed 
to 
a 
computer-implemented therapeutic method (T 1680/08). In this respect, the 
same observations as in G-II, 4.2.1.1, for computer-implemented surgical 
methods apply. 
4.2.1.3 Diagnostic methods 
Diagnostic methods likewise do not cover all methods related to diagnosis. 
To determine whether a claim is directed to a diagnostic method within the 
meaning of Art. 53(c) and thus excluded from patentability, it must first be 
established whether all of the necessary phases are included in the claim 
(G 1/04). 
The claim must include method steps relating to all of the following phases: 
(i) 
the examination phase, involving the collection of data, 
(ii) 
the comparison of these data with standard values, 
(iii) 
the finding of any significant deviation, i.e. a symptom, during the 
comparison, 
(iv) 
the attribution of the deviation to a particular clinical picture, i.e. the 
deductive medical or veterinary decision phase (diagnosis for 
curative purposes stricto sensu). 
Part G – Chapter II-34 

 
 
If features pertaining to any of these phases are missing and are essential 
for the definition of the invention, those features are to be included in the 
independent claim (see Example 6 in the Annex to F-IV). Due account must 
be taken of steps which may be considered to be implicit: for example, 
steps relating to the comparison of data with standard values (phase (ii)) 
may imply the finding of a significant deviation (phase (iii) – see T 1197/02). 
The deductive medical or veterinary decision phase (iv), i.e. the "diagnosis 
for curative purposes stricto sensu", is the determination of the nature of a 
medical or veterinary medicinal condition intended to identify or uncover a 
pathology; the identification of the underlying disease is not required 
(see T 125/02). 
Additionally, a method is only regarded as a diagnostic method within the 
meaning of Art. 53(c), and thus excluded from patentability, if all method 
steps of a technical nature belonging to the preceding steps which are 
constitutive for making the diagnosis, i.e. phases (i)-(iii), satisfy the criterion 
"practised on the human or animal body". However, the steps of phases (ii) 
and (iii) which consist in comparing the data collected in the examination 
phase with standard values and in finding a significant deviation resulting 
from the comparison are not subject to this criterion, because these 
activities are predominantly of a non-technical nature and are normally not 
practised on the human or animal body. Therefore, in most cases only 
phase (i), which relates to the examination phase and involves the 
collection of data, can actually be of a technical nature within the meaning 
of G 1/04 and therefore concerned with the criterion "practised on the 
human or animal body" (see T 1197/02, T 143/04, T 1016/10). 
It is noted that only the steps strictly describing phases (i)-(iv) have to be 
taken into account in determining the diagnostic character of the claimed 
method. Additional, preparatory or intermediate steps which may be 
introduced into the claimed method are irrelevant for this question (see 
T 1197/02, T 143/04, T 1016/10). For example, preparatory steps which 
concern the adjustment or preparation of the apparatus with which the 
collection of data will be performed may be comprised in a method claim. 
However, these additional features are not part of any of phases (i)-(iii), 
which are constitutive for making the diagnosis. Likewise, data processing 
using an automated apparatus is not actually part of the examination phase 
which involves the collection of data, but it results from a subsequent step, 
intermediate between data collection and the comparison of the collected 
data with standard values. The issue of whether or not such additional 
steps are of a technical nature and practised on the human or animal body 
is, therefore, irrelevant for the assessment of whether a claimed method is 
a diagnostic method falling under the exception clause of Art. 53(c). 
In order to determine whether a method step of a technical nature fulfils the 
criterion "practised on the human or animal body" it must be ascertained 
whether an interaction with the human or animal body takes place. The 
type or intensity of the interaction is not decisive: this criterion is fulfilled if 
the performance of the method step in question necessitates the presence 
of the body. Direct physical contact with the body is not required. 
 

Part G – Chapter II-35 
 
It is noted that a medical or veterinary practitioner does not have to be 
involved, either by being present or by bearing the overall responsibility, in 
the procedure. 
If all of the above criteria are satisfied, then the claim defines a diagnostic 
method practised on the human or animal body, and an objection will be 
raised under Art. 53(c). 
Accordingly, methods for merely obtaining information (data, physical 
quantities) from the living human or animal body (e.g. X-ray investigations, 
MRI studies, and blood pressure measurements) are not excluded from 
patentability under Art. 53(c). 
4.2.2 Methods for screening potential medicaments and clinical 
trials 
Although in general a medical claim directed to tests carried out on 
"animals" must exclude from its scope the use of human beings as "test 
animals" (e.g. by means of a disclaimer), in some infrequent cases, a claim 
may, in the light of the description, be interpreted as exclusively relating to 
a clinical trial of an experimental medicament carried out on human beings. 
It is assumed that unless there is evidence to the contrary, such trials are 
performed under strictly controlled conditions and with the informed 
consent of the patient concerned. In such cases, no objection under 
Art. 53(a) is raised (see however G-II, 4.2.1.2). 
5. Exclusions and exceptions for biotechnological inventions 
5.1 General remarks and definitions 
"Biotechnological inventions" are inventions which concern a product 
consisting of or containing biological material or a process by means of 
which biological material is produced, processed or used. "Biological 
material" means any material containing genetic information and capable of 
reproducing itself or being reproduced in a biological system. 
5.2 Patentable biotechnological inventions 
In principle, biotechnological inventions are patentable under the EPC. For 
European patent applications and patents concerning biotechnological 
inventions, the relevant provisions of the EPC are to be applied and 
interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Rules 26 to 29. European 
Union Directive 98/44/EC of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of 
biotechnological inventions (OJ EPO 1999, 101) is to be used as a 
supplementary means of interpretation. In particular the recitals 
(abbreviated as rec.) preceding the provisions of the Directive are also to 
be taken into account. Judgments of the Court of Justice of the European 
Union on the interpretation of EU Directive 98/44/EC are not binding on the 
EPO. Still, they may be considered as being persuasive (T 2221/10 and 
T 1441/13). 
Art. 53(a) 
Rule 26(2) and (3) 
Rule 27 
Rule 26(1) 
Part G – Chapter II-36 

 
 
Biotechnological inventions are also patentable if they concern an item on 
the following non-exhaustive list: 
(i) 
Biological material which is isolated from its natural environment or 
produced by means of a technical process even if it previously 
occurred in nature 
Hence, biological material may be considered patentable even if it 
already occurs in nature (see also G-II, 3.1). 
Although the human body, at the various stages of its formation and 
development, and the simple discovery of one of its elements, 
including the sequence or partial sequence of a gene, cannot 
constitute patentable inventions (see G-II, 5.3), an element isolated 
from the human body or otherwise produced by means of a technical 
process, which is susceptible of industrial application, including the 
sequence or partial sequence of a gene, may constitute a patentable 
invention, even if the structure of that element is identical to that of a 
natural element. Such an element is not a priori excluded from 
patentability since it is, for example, the result of technical processes 
used to identify, purify and classify it and to produce it outside the 
human body, techniques which human beings alone are capable of 
putting into practice and which nature is incapable of accomplishing 
itself (EU Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 21). 
The examination of a patent application or a patent for gene 
sequences or partial sequences is subject to the same criteria of 
patentability as in all other areas of technology (EU Dir. 98/44/EC, 
rec. 22). The industrial application of a sequence or partial sequence 
must be disclosed in the patent application as filed (see G-III, 4). 
(ii) 
Plants or animals if the technical feasibility of the invention is not 
confined to a particular plant or animal variety and if said plants or 
animals are not exclusively obtained by means of an essentially 
biological process 
Inventions which concern plants or animals are patentable provided 
that the application of the invention is not technically confined to a 
single plant or animal variety (EU Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 29). However, 
said plants or animals must not be exclusively obtained by means of 
an essentially biological process (see G-II, 5.4). 
The exclusion regarding plants and animals exclusively obtained by 
means of an essentially biological process applies to patent 
applications with a filing date and/or a priority date after 1 July 2017. 
It does not apply to patents granted before that date or to pending 
patent applications with a filing date and/or a priority date before 
1 July 2017 (see G 3/19, OJ EPO 2020, A119). 
If a technical feature of a claimed plant or animal, e.g. a single 
nucleotide exchange in the genome, can be the result of both a 
technical intervention (e.g. directed mutagenesis) and an essentially 
Rule 27(a) 
Rule 29(1) and (2) 
Rule 29(3) 
Rule 27(b) 
Rule 28(2) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-37 
 
biological process (a natural allele), a disclaimer is necessary to 
delimit the claimed subject-matter to the technically produced product 
(see examples in G-II, 5.4.2.1 and G-II, 5.4). Such a disclaimer will 
only be necessary for patent applications with a filing date and/or a 
priority date after 1 July 2017. A disclaimer will not be required for 
patents granted before that date or for pending patent applications 
with a filing date and/or a priority date before 1 July 2017 (see 
G 3/19, OJ EPO 2020, A119). If, on the other hand, the feature in 
question can be obtained by technical intervention only, e.g. a 
transgene, no disclaimer is necessary. For the general principles 
governing disclaimers, see H-V, 4. 
The subject-matter of a claim covering but not identifying plant 
varieties is not a claim to a variety or varieties (see G 1/98, 
Reasons 3.8). In the absence of the identification of a specific plant 
variety in a product claim, the subject-matter of the claimed invention 
is neither limited nor directed to a variety or varieties within the 
meaning of Art. 53(b) (G 1/98, Reasons 3.1 and 3.10) and therefore 
is not excluded from patentability. More detailed instructions on the 
exclusions on plant varieties can be found in G-II, 5.4.1. 
(iii) 
A microbiological or other technical process, or a product obtained by 
means of such a process other than a plant or animal variety 
"Microbiological process" means any process involving or performed 
upon or resulting in microbiological material. 
5.3 List of exceptions (Rule 28) 
In the area of biotechnological inventions, the following list of exceptions to 
patentability under Art. 53(a) and Art. 53(b) is laid down in Rule 28. Under 
Art. 53(a) the list is illustrative and non-exhaustive and is to be seen as 
giving concrete form to the concept of "ordre public" and "morality" in this 
technical field. A possible immoral use is only to be taken into account if it 
is specifically considered or at least suggested in the application and can 
thus be found to constitute an avowed use (G-II, 4.1 and T 866/01). 
According to Rule 28(2), plants and animals exclusively obtained by means 
of an essentially biological process are excluded from patentability. This 
exclusion regarding plants and animals exclusively obtained by means of 
an essentially biological process applies to patent applications with a filing 
date and/or a priority date after 1 July 2017. It does not apply to patents 
granted before that date or to pending patent applications with a filing date 
and/or a priority date before 1 July 2017 (see G 3/19, OJ EPO 2020, A119). 
Under Art. 53(a), in conjunction with Rule 28(1), European patents are not 
to be granted in respect of biotechnological inventions which concern: 
(i) 
Processes for cloning human beings 
For the purpose of this exception, a process for the cloning of human 
beings may be defined as any process, including techniques of 
embryo splitting, designed to create a human being with the same 
Rule 27(c) 
Rule 26(6) 
Rule 28(1) 
Rule 28(1)(a) 
Part G – Chapter II-38 

 
 
nuclear genetic information as another living or deceased human 
being (EU Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 41). 
(ii) 
Processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human 
beings 
(iii) 
Uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes 
A claim directed to a product which at the filing date of the application 
could be exclusively obtained by a method which necessarily 
involved the destruction of human embryos from which the said 
product is derived is excluded from patentability under Rule 28(1)(c), 
even if said method is not part of the claim (see G 2/06). The point in 
time at which such destruction takes place is irrelevant (T 2221/10). 
When examining subject-matter relating to human embryonic stem 
cells under Art. 53(a) and Rule 28(1)(c), the following has to be taken 
into account: 
(a) 
the entire teaching of the application, not only the claim 
category and wording, and 
(b) 
the relevant disclosure in the description in order to 
establish whether products such as stem cell cultures are 
obtained exclusively by the use, involving the destruction, of a 
human embryo or not. For this purpose, the disclosure of the 
description has to be considered in view of the state of the art 
at the date of filing. 
An application pertaining to human pluripotent stem cells, including 
human embryonic stem cells, uses thereof or products derived 
therefrom cannot be regarded as excluded from patentability under 
Art. 53(a) and Rule 28(1)(c) (T 0385/14) if (i) the application has an 
effective date (i.e. a valid priority date or, if no priority is claimed or 
the priority is not valid, a filing date) on or after 5 June 2003, and (ii) 
its technical teaching can be put into practice using human 
embryonic stem cells derived from parthenogenetically activated 
human oocytes. In such cases, any disclosure, embodiment, 
example or similar encompassing the use of human embryonic stem 
cells excluded from patentability under Art. 53(a) must be excised 
from the description or prominently marked as not being according to 
the claimed invention (e.g. by using the term "reference human 
embryonic stem cell") (see F-IV, 4.3). 
Foetal and post-natal human cells are in principle not excluded from 
patentability. 
Culture media, supports and apparatuses "suitable for" use with 
human embryonic cells, or even "specifically designed" for this 
purpose, are not per se excluded from patentability. Their production 
normally does not require the use of human embryos as base 
material. 
Rule 28(1)(b) 
Rule 28(1)(c) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-39 
 
The exclusion of the use of human embryos for industrial or 
commercial purposes does not affect inventions for therapeutic or 
diagnostic purposes which are applied to the human embryo and are 
useful to it (EU Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 42). 
(iv) 
Processes for modifying the genetic identity of animals which are 
likely to cause them suffering without any substantial medical benefit 
to man or animal, and also animals resulting from such processes 
A claim directed to genetically modified animals or to processes for 
genetically modifying animals needs to meet the requirements of 
Rule 28(1)(d) and Art. 53(a) (see T 315/03 and T 19/90).  
To fulfil the requirements of Rule 28(1)(d), the following needs to be 
established: 
(a) 
that the subject-matter in question concerns a process for 
modifying the genetic identity of animals or animals resulting 
from that process,  
(b) 
the likelihood of animal suffering, 
(c) 
the likelihood of substantial medical benefit and 
(d) 
the 
necessary 
correspondence 
between 
suffering 
and 
substantial medical benefit in terms of the animals claimed. 
The level or standard of proof for establishing animal suffering and 
substantial medical benefit is likelihood. The correspondence has to 
be established according to the balance-of-probabilities approach 
(E-IV, 4.3). 
For Art. 53(a), a careful weighing-up of the suffering of animals and 
possible risks to the environment, on the one hand, and the 
invention's usefulness to mankind, on the other hand, are used to the 
extent that those two aspects are supported by evidence (see 
T 19/90 and T 315/03). 
The substantial medical benefit referred to above includes any 
benefit in terms of research, prevention, diagnosis or therapy (EU 
Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 45). 
The above must be applied to the whole scope of the claim.  
For applications relating to non-genetically modified animals, in all 
cases where animal suffering or possible risks to the environment is 
involved, the provisions of Art. 53(a) have to be assessed by 
considering the invention's usefulness to mankind (T 1553/15). 
In addition, the human body, at the various stages of its formation and 
development, and the simple discovery of one of its elements, including the 
sequence or partial sequence of a gene, cannot constitute patentable 
Rule 28(1)(d) 
Rule 29(1) 
Part G – Chapter II-40 

 
 
inventions (see, however, G-II, 5.2). Such stages in the formation or 
development of the human body include germ cells (EU Dir. 98/44/EC, 
rec. 16). 
A parthenote is neither a human body at a stage of its formation and 
development nor one of its elements (i.e. human germ cell); thus a 
parthenote or cells derived therefrom are in principle not excluded from 
patentability under Rule 29(1). 
Also excluded from patentability under Art. 53(a) are processes to produce 
chimeras from germ cells or totipotent cells of humans and animals 
(EU Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 38). 
5.4 Plant and animal varieties or essentially biological processes for 
the production of plants or animals 
The list of exceptions to patentability under Art. 53(b) also includes "plant or 
animal varieties or essentially biological processes for the production of 
plants or animals". 
Rule 28(2) excludes products (plants/animals and plant/animal parts) 
exclusively obtained by non-technical, i.e. essentially biological, processes. 
This exclusion regarding plants and animals exclusively obtained by means 
of an essentially biological process applies to patent applications with a 
filing date and/or a priority date after 1 July 2017. It does not apply to 
patents granted before that date or to pending patent applications with a 
filing date and/or a priority date before 1 July 2017 (see G 3/19, OJ EPO 
2020, A119). 
The exclusion extends to plants and animals exclusively obtained by 
means of an essentially biological process where no direct technical 
intervention in the genome of the plants or animals takes place, as the 
relevant parental plants or animals are merely crossed and the desired 
offspring is selected for. This is the case even if technical means are 
provided serving to enable or assist the performance of the essentially 
biological steps. In contrast, plants or animals produced by a technical 
process which modifies the genetic characteristics of the plant or animal 
are patentable. 
The term exclusively is used here to mean that a plant or animal 
originating from a technical process or characterised by a technical 
intervention in the genome is not covered by the exclusion from 
patentability even if in addition a non-technical method (crossing and 
selection) is applied in its production. 
Determining whether a plant or animal is obtained by exclusively biological 
means entails examining whether there is a change in a heritable 
characteristic of the claimed organism which is the result of a technical 
process exceeding mere crossing and selection, i.e. not merely serving to 
enable or assist the performance of the essentially biological process steps. 
Thus transgenic plants and technically induced mutants are patentable, 
while the products of conventional breeding are not. 
Art. 53(b) 
Rule 28(2) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-41 
 
Both targeted mutation, e.g. with CRISPR/Cas, and random mutagenesis 
such as UV-induced mutation are such technical processes. When looking 
at the offspring of transgenic organisms or mutants, if the mutation or 
transgene is present in said offspring it is not produced exclusively by an 
essentially biological method and is thus patentable. 
Furthermore, for living matter to be patentable, it must be possible to 
reproduce it in a way that has exactly the same technical features. 
Reproducibility can be assured for example: 
(1) 
By a deposit of the living matter (seeds, microbiological strains). The 
deposited material must be publicly available and such that the 
invention can actually be reproduced starting from it. If, for example, 
a novel and inventive trait is due to a single transgene, a skilled 
person can reproduce the invention from a living sample. If, instead, 
the claimed trait is dependent on a large number of structurally 
undefined loci in the genome, these will segregate in subsequent 
generations and it will be an undue burden to reproduce the invention 
from the deposited sample (T 1957/14). 
(2) 
By disclosing in the application as filed the gene sequence 
responsible for the claimed trait together with instructions on how to 
reproducibly introduce by technical means such an altered sequence 
in a target organism (e.g. by CRISPR-Cas). 
If a technical feature of a claimed plant or animal, e.g. a single nucleotide 
exchange in the genome, might be the result of either a technical 
intervention (e.g. directed mutagenesis) or an essentially biological process 
(a natural allele), a disclaimer is necessary to delimit the claimed 
subject-matter to the technically produced product in order to comply with 
the requirements of Art. 53(b) and Rule 28(2). Otherwise the subject-matter 
is directed to excluded subject-matter and is to be refused on the basis of 
Art. 53(b) in conjunction with Rule 28(2). A disclaimer is required in all 
cases and, in particular, even if the description only mentions a technical 
method of production and is silent on the use of an essentially biological 
process. If, on the other hand, the feature in question can unambiguously 
be obtained by technical intervention only, e.g. a transgene, no disclaimer 
is necessary. 
This should apply also if such a disclaimer relates to subject-matter that 
was not disclosed in the application as filed. In such a case the disclaimer 
fulfils the requirements laid down in G 1/03, G 2/03 and G 1/16 because it 
is introduced to exclude subject-matter not eligible for patent protection (for 
the general principles governing disclaimers see also H-V, 4). 
Such a disclaimer will only be necessary for patent applications with a filing 
date and/or a priority date after 1 July 2017. A disclaimer will not be 
required for patents granted before that date or for pending patent 
applications with a filing date and/or a priority date before 1 July 2017 (see 
G 3/19, OJ EPO 2020, A119). 
Part G – Chapter II-42 

 
 
The technicality of a claimed plant or animal product may lie in a 
non-heritable physical feature imparted directly to the claimed organism, 
e.g. a seed coated with a beneficial chemical. 
The technical method of production of the plant or animal may be included 
in the claims, in the form of product-by-process claims (see F-IV, 4.12). 
Plant products that are not propagation material, such as flour, sugars or 
fatty acids, have to be considered on the basis of their chemical properties 
only. Thus provided the general patentability requirements are fulfilled, it 
will not be relevant whether the subject-matter (e.g. a sugar molecule) is 
isolated from a product (e.g. a living plant) of an essentially biological 
process or is produced in a laboratory. 
Examples are provided below under G-II, 5.4.2.1. 
This exclusion regarding plants and animals exclusively obtained by means 
of an essentially biological process does not apply to patents granted 
before 1 July 2017 or to pending patent applications with a filing date 
and/or a priority date before 1 July 2017 (see G 3/19, OJ EPO 2020, A119). 
For these applications and these granted patents, the exclusion from 
patentability of essentially biological processes for the production of plants 
does not have a negative effect on the allowability of a product claim 
directed to plants or plant material such as seeds or other plant propagation 
material. This applies even if the only method available at the filing date for 
generating the claimed plants or plant material is an essentially biological 
process for the production of plants, and also if the claimed product is 
defined in terms of such a process (product-by-process claim, see 
F-IV, 4.12). In this context it is of no relevance that the protection conferred 
by the product claim encompasses the generation of the claimed product 
by means of an essentially biological process for the production of plants 
(see G 2/12 and G 2/13). The same principle applies mutatis mutandis with 
regard to animals produced by means of essentially biological processes 
(see also F-IV, 4.12). 
For patent applications with a filing date and/or a priority date on or after 
1 July 2017, if the technical characteristics of a claimed plant or animal are 
due to a technical step, the description must not contain any references to 
essentially biological methods (such as screening wild populations or 
conventional breeding) as an alternative method to obtain the claimed plant 
or animal. If such references are made, they must be deleted because they 
are not commensurate with the scope of the claim. Adapting the description 
is necessary – in addition to the disclaimer in the claims – to bring it into 
line with the claims (see F-IV, 4.3) but there is no need for an additional 
disclaimer in the description. In contrast, any mention of essentially 
biological processes to multiply or transfer a feature obtained with technical 
means, e.g. mutagenesis, may remain in the description, even though they 
cannot be claimed. 
 

Part G – Chapter II-43 
 
5.4.1 Plant varieties 
The term "plant variety" is defined in Rule 26(4). A patent is not to be 
granted if the claimed subject-matter is directed to a specific plant variety or 
specific plant varieties. The method for the plant's production, be it by 
recombinant gene technology or by a classical plant breeding process, is 
irrelevant for considering this issue (see T 1854/07). Therefore, plant 
varieties containing genes introduced into an ancestral plant by 
recombinant gene technology are excluded from patentability (G 1/98). 
However, if the invention concerns plants or animals, which are not 
exclusively obtained by means of an essentially biological process (see 
G-II, 5.4, above and G 3/19), and if the technical feasibility of the invention 
is not confined to a particular plant or animal variety, the invention is 
patentable (see G-II, 5.2). 
A claimed plant grouping is not excluded from patentability under Art. 53(b) 
if it does not meet the definition of a plant variety set out in Rule 26(4). 
When a claim to a process for the production of a plant variety is examined, 
Art. 64(2) is not to be taken into consideration (see G 1/98). Hence, a 
process claim for the production of a plant variety (or plant varieties), which 
is not exclusively essentially biological, is not a priori excluded from 
patentability merely because the resulting product constitutes or may 
constitute a plant variety. 
Controlled hybrids with inbred parents are excluded from patentability 
under Art. 53(b), as they define either a seed or a plant which necessarily 
belongs to a particular plant grouping within the meaning of plant variety 
pursuant to Rule 26(4). 
A claim cannot escape the exclusion of plant varieties under Art. 53(b) by 
consisting of a large number of varieties, not even if there are hundreds of 
them. Only if the subject-matter of the claim comprises at least one 
embodiment which does not constitute a variety is the claim allowable 
under Art. 53(b) (see T 1208/12). For instance, a claim directed to a hybrid 
of a specific deposited Brassica variety with any high-yielding Brassica 
variety results in a Brassica hybrid variety, which is not patentable. 
5.4.2 Essentially biological processes for the production of plants or 
animals 
A process for the production of plants or animals which is based on the 
sexual crossing of whole genomes and on the subsequent selection of 
plants or animals is excluded from patentability as being essentially 
biological. This applies even if the process comprises human intervention, 
including the provision of technical means, serving to enable or assist the 
performance of the process steps or if other technical steps relating to the 
preparation of the plant or animal or its further treatment are present in the 
claim before or after the crossing and selection steps (see G 1/08 and 
G 2/07). 
To take some examples, a method of crossing, interbreeding, or selectively 
breeding, say, horses involving merely selecting for breeding and bringing 
together those animals (or their gametes) having certain characteristics 
Rule 26(4) 
Rule 27(b) 
Rule 28(2) 
Rule 26(5) 
Part G – Chapter II-44 

 
 
would be essentially biological and therefore excluded from patentability. 
Also selfing of a transgenic plant is excluded from patentability, as selfing, 
like crossing, is the mixing of entire genomes. These methods remain 
essentially biological and thus excluded from patentability even if they 
contain an additional feature of a technical nature, for example the use of 
genetic molecular markers to select either parent or progeny. Patent 
protection is available for any such additional technical steps per se which 
are performed either before or after the process of crossing and selection. 
However, such steps are ignored when determining whether or not the 
process as a whole is excluded from patentability under Art. 53(b) EPC 
(see G 1/08, G 2/07). 
However, if a process of sexual crossing and selection includes within it an 
additional step of a technical nature, which step by itself introduces a trait 
into the genome or modifies a trait in the genome of the plant produced, so 
that the introduction or modification of that trait is not the result of the 
mixing of the genes of the plants chosen for sexual crossing, then such a 
process is not excluded from patentability under Art. 53(b) but qualifies as a 
potentially patentable technical teaching (see G 1/08, G 2/07). 
Genetic engineering techniques applied to plants which techniques differ 
profoundly from conventional breeding techniques as they work primarily 
through the purposeful insertion and/or modification of one or more genes 
in a plant are patentable (see T 356/93). However, in such cases the claims 
must not, explicitly or implicitly, include the sexual crossing and selection 
process. 
Processes for selecting plants or animals using genetic molecular markers 
without crossing the plants or animals are not excluded from patentability. 
Technical means, such as genetic molecular markers, used in such 
processes are not excluded, either. 
A process for producing triploid seedless melon fruit which involves the 
pollination of sterile female flowers of a triploid plant, unable to carry out 
successful meiosis, with pollen of the diploid polliniser plant and which 
therefore does not concern sexually crossing two whole genomes of plants 
(implying meiosis and fertilisation) and the subsequent selection of plants is 
not an essentially biological process and is hence not excluded from 
patentability (T 1729/06). 
A process of treating a plant or animal to improve its properties or yield or 
to promote or suppress its growth, e.g. a method of pruning a tree, would 
not be an essentially biological process for the production of plants or 
animals since it is not based on the sexual crossing of whole genomes and 
subsequent selection of plants or animals; the same applies to a method of 
treating a plant characterised by the application of a growth-stimulating 
substance or radiation. The treatment of soil by technical means to 
suppress or promote the growth of plants is also not excluded from 
patentability (see also G-II, 4.2.1). 
 

Part G – Chapter II-45 
 
Claims to breeding methods leaving out an explicit reference to either a 
crossing or selection step, but where such a step is an essential feature, 
lack clarity and support (Art. 84). 
The abbreviation NBT stands for "new breeding techniques". This is not a 
technical term, but a general one which is used for a variety of methods, 
some clearly technical but others either comprising or consisting of 
essentially biological processes. Therefore it is not suitable to differentiate 
whether claimed subject-matter is allowable under Art. 53(b) and has no 
relevance in terms of patentability. 
5.4.2.1 Examples 
The following subject-matter relates to essentially biological processes 
excluded from patentability: 
– 
Method for the production of plants having trait X comprising crossing 
plants A and B and selecting progeny having marker X. 
– 
Use of a (transgenic) plant for generating further plants by crossing 
and selection. 
– 
Use of a (transgenic) animal for breeding. 
– 
Introgression of a (transgenic) gene X into a plant, i.e. introducing it 
into the genome by crossing and selection. 
– 
Methods for plant breeding by crossing of whole genomes and 
selection of plants comprising the step of embryo rescue. 
The following subject-matter relates to products exclusively obtained by 
means of an essentially biological process excluded from patentability and 
having a filing date or priority date after 1 July 2017 (see G 3/19): 
– 
A plant produced by introgression of gene A, i.e. by introducing it into 
the genome by crossing and selection. 
– 
A plant produced exclusively by crossing and selection, wherein 
molecular markers are used to assist the selection process. 
– 
A plant part obtained exclusively by means of an essentially 
biological process which is propagation material, e.g. a seed or plant 
embryo. 
– 
A cultivated pepper plant expressing a mutant AHAS enzyme 
The following subject-matter is not excluded from patentability under 
Art. 53(b): 
– 
Method of producing a (transgenic) plant having trait X comprising 
introducing by transformation a vector comprising the sequence of 
SEQ ID NO: 1. 
Part G – Chapter II-46 

 
 
– 
Method for selecting animals having phenotype Y by screening for 
the presence of a marker having the sequence shown in 
SEQ ID NO: 1. 
– 
Use of the nucleic acid of SEQ ID NO: 1 to select a plant having 
trait X. 
– 
A mutant of a plant carrying a heritable exchange in a nucleotide 
sequence effected by technical means, e.g. UV mutagenesis or 
CRISPR/Cas with the proviso that the plant is not exclusively 
obtained by means of an essentially biological process (EBP). 
– 
A transgenic plant carrying transgene X. 
– 
Progeny of a mutant (wherein the mutant is not exclusively produced 
by EBP) or a transgenic plant which carries the mutation/the 
transgene. 
– 
A seed of a wild-type plant covered with a chemical which inhibits 
fungal growth. 
– 
Flour or oil produced from plant X (even if it is apparent from the 
description that said plant was exclusively obtained by means of an 
essentially biological method). 
5.5 Microbiological processes 
5.5.1 General remarks 
As expressly stated in Art. 53(b), second half-sentence, the exception 
referred to in the first half-sentence does not apply to microbiological 
processes or the products thereof. 
"Microbiological process" means any process involving or performed upon 
or resulting in microbiological material. Hence, the term "microbiological 
process" is to be interpreted as covering not only processes performed 
upon microbiological material or resulting in such, e.g. by genetic 
engineering, but also processes which as claimed include both 
microbiological and non-microbiological steps. 
The product of a microbiological process may also be patentable per se 
(product claim). Propagation of the microorganism itself is to be construed 
as a microbiological process for the purposes of Art. 53(b). Consequently, 
the microorganism can be protected per se as it is a product obtained by a 
microbiological process (see G-II, 3.1). The term "microorganism" includes 
bacteria and other generally unicellular organisms with dimensions beneath 
the limits of vision which can be propagated and manipulated in a 
laboratory (see T 356/93), including plasmids and viruses and unicellular 
fungi (including yeasts), algae, protozoa and, moreover, human, animal and 
plant cells. Isolated plant or animal cells or in vitro plant or animal cell 
cultures are treated as microorganisms, since cells are comparable to 
unicellular organisms (G 1/98, 5.2). 
Art. 53(b) 
Rule 26(6) 
Rule 27(c) 
 

Part G – Chapter II-47 
 
On the other hand, product claims for plant or animal varieties cannot be 
allowed even if the variety is produced by means of a microbiological 
process (Rule 27(c)). The exception to patentability in Art. 53(b), first 
half-sentence, applies to plant varieties irrespective of the way in which 
they are produced. 
However, plant cells or tissues are usually totipotent and are able to 
regenerate the full plant. Therefore, even if plant cells or cell cultures may 
be regarded as the product of a microbiological process, plant material 
which is able to propagate the full plant is excluded from patentability if the 
plant from which the material originates has been exclusively produced by 
an essentially biological process (G 3/19) (for the meaning of the term 
"exclusively" in relation, for example, to offspring of transgenic organisms 
or mutants, see G-II, 5.4). Said exclusion does not apply to patents granted 
before 1 July 2017 nor to pending patent applications with a filing date 
and/or a priority date before 1 July 2017 (see G 3/19, XXIX). 
5.5.2 Repeatability of results of microbiological processes 
In the case of microbiological processes, particular regard has to be had to 
the requirement of repeatability referred to in F-III, 3. As for biological 
material deposited under the terms of Rule 31, repeatability is assured by 
the possibility of taking samples (Rule 33(1)), and there is thus no need to 
indicate another process for the production of the biological material. 
6. Antibodies 
6.1 General remarks 
Antibodies exist in a number of different formats. The most frequently used 
format is an immunoglobulin G (IgG), which is a large, Y-shaped protein 
composed of two identical light chains and two identical heavy chains, both 
containing variable and constant domains. Antibodies bind specifically to 
antigen 
targets 
via 
the 
antigen 
binding 
region 
which 
contains 
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs). In the case of an IgG, the 
antigen binding region consists of a heavy and light chain variable domain, 
each variable domain having three CDRs. 
Other immunoglobulin structures are also known, such as heavy-chain-only 
antibodies that consist of only two identical heavy chains (with variable and 
constant domains) and the antigen-binding region consists of a single 
variable domain with only three CDRs. 
Furthermore, knowledge of the structure-function relationships of parts of 
the antibody has allowed for the creation of antibody derivatives for a 
multitude of applications. These include antibody fragments, bispecific or 
multispecific antibodies and antibody fusion products. 
In general, antibodies can be defined by (but are not limited to): 
(a) 
their own structure (amino acid sequences); 
(b) 
nucleic acid sequences encoding the antibody; 
Rule 33(1) 
Part G – Chapter II-48 

 
 
(c) 
reference to the target antigen; 
(d) 
target antigen and further functional features; 
(e) 
functional and structural features; 
(f) 
the production process; 
(g) 
the hybridoma producing the antibody. 
6.1.1 Definition by structure of the antibody 
In order to fulfil the requirements of Art. 84, the structural definition of an 
antibody must contain at least the sequence of each of the CDRs required 
for binding to the antigen, which, in the case of an IgG, is CDRs 1-3 of each 
of the variable domains. 
Hence, if an IgG is defined by fewer than its six CDRs, the claim will be 
objected to under Art. 84 because it lacks essential technical features 
unless it is experimentally shown that one or more of the six CDRs do not 
interact with the antigen. 
If CDRs are not defined by their specific sequence, but by reference to a 
larger heavy or light chain sequence, the numbering scheme, for example 
Kabat, Chothia or IMGT, must also be indicated. 
6.1.2 Definition by reference to the target antigen 
An antibody can be functionally defined by the antigen it binds to, as long 
as the antigen is clearly defined in the claims. If the antigen is defined by a 
protein sequence, no sequence variability and no open language (e.g. an 
antigen comprising …) can be used in the definition of the antigen. 
Otherwise the subject-matter of the claim will be considered to lack novelty 
over any known antibody because existing antibodies will bind to the 
undefined region of the target antigen. 
Examples of accepted antigen-defined antibody claim wording are: 
– 
antibody binding to X; 
– 
anti-X antibody; 
– 
antibody reacting with X; 
– 
antibody specific for antigen X or 
– 
antibody binding to antigen X consisting of the sequence defined by 
SEQ. ID. NO: y. 
An antibody can also be defined by its ability to bind to a well-defined 
antigen in combination with a negative feature as for example: "Antibody 
binding to antigen X and not binding to antigen Y". 
 

Part G – Chapter II-49 
 
6.1.3 Definition by target antigen and further functional features 
In addition to the functional definition by their target antigen, antibodies can 
be further characterised by functional features defining their other 
properties; for example, the binding affinity, neutralising properties, 
induction of apoptosis, internalisation, inhibition or activation of receptors.  
An antibody may also be claimed by reference to its epitope, i.e. the 
structurally defined part of the antigen that it specifically binds to. Claims 
are sometimes directed to antibodies defined by their ability to compete 
with a reference antibody which is disclosed for the first time in the 
application. However, this property will not normally be sufficient to identify 
antibodies in the state of the art. In such a case, a complete search cannot 
be carried out (B-VIII, 3) and an invitation under Rule 63(1) to indicate 
subject-matter for search is sent (B-VIII, 3.1). 
In all these cases, in the absence of any indication to the contrary, it is to 
be assumed that a prior-art antibody binding the same target antigen will 
have the claimed functional properties. Therefore a novelty objection may 
be raised and the burden of proof lies with the applicant (cf. G-VI, 5).  
The application must enable the person skilled in the art to produce further 
antibodies having the claimed functional property without undue burden 
(cf. F-III, 1 and 4). Furthermore, the functional definition must allow the 
skilled person to easily and unambiguously verify whether they are working 
inside or outside the scope of the claim. The claim should therefore 
normally include the relevant characteristics of the method used to 
determine and define the functional property (cf F-IV, 4.11). 
6.1.4 Definition by functional and structural features 
Antibodies can also be defined by both functional properties and structural 
features. It is possible to claim an antibody characterised by the sequences 
of both variable domains or CDRs with less than 100% sequence identity 
when combined with a clear functional feature. 
6.1.5 Definition by production process 
Antibodies can be defined by the process of their production, i.e. either by 
the immunisation protocol of a non-human animal with a well-characterised 
antigen or by the specific cell line used to produce them; for more details 
see F-IV, 4.12. 
However, such a product-by-process definition, based on the immunisation 
by an antigen comprising a sequence less than 100% identical to a defined 
sequence does not fulfil the requirements of Art. 84 because the use of 
variants renders the scope of the antibodies obtained by the immunisation 
process unclear. 
6.1.6 Definition by hybridoma 
Antibodies may also be defined through a deposited hybridoma cell 
producing the antibodies. The general requirements for deposited biological 
materials apply, see F-III, 6.3. 
Part G – Chapter II-50 

 
 
6.2 Inventive step of antibodies 
The subject-matter of a claim defining a novel antibody binding to a known 
antigen does not involve an inventive step unless a surprising technical 
effect is shown in the application or unless there was no reasonable 
expectation of success of obtaining antibodies having the required 
properties (cf G-VII, 13). Examples of surprising technical effects include an 
unexpected improvement over prior-art antibodies in one or more 
properties, such as therapeutic activity, stability or immunogenicity, or an 
unexpected property not exhibited by prior-art antibodies. 
Inventive step is not acknowledged solely on the basis that an antibody is 
structurally different from the prior-art antibodies. Arriving at alternative 
antibodies exclusively by applying techniques known in the art is 
considered to be obvious to the skilled person. The fact that the structure of 
an antibody, i.e. its amino acid sequence, is not predictable is not a reason 
for considering the antibody as non-obvious (see T 605/14, section 24; 
T 187/04, section 11).  
Nevertheless, antibodies can be inventive if the application overcomes 
technical difficulties in generating or manufacturing the claimed antibodies. 
A novel type of functional antibody format may also be considered 
inventive. 
 

Part G – Chapter III-1 
 
Chapter III – Industrial application 
1. General remarks 
"An invention shall be considered as susceptible of industrial application if it 
can be made or used in any kind of industry, including agriculture". 
"Industry" is understood in its broad sense as including any physical activity 
of "technical character" (see G-I, 1), i.e. an activity which belongs to the 
useful or practical arts as distinct from the aesthetic arts; it does not 
necessarily imply the use of a machine or the manufacture of an article and 
could cover e.g. a process for dispersing fog or for converting energy from 
one form to another. Thus, Art. 57 excludes from patentability very few 
"inventions" which are not already excluded by the list in Art. 52(2) 
(see F-II, 1). One further class of "invention" which would be excluded, 
however, would be articles or processes alleged to operate in a manner 
clearly contrary to well-established physical laws, e.g. a perpetual motion 
machine. An objection could arise under Art. 57 only in so far as the claim 
specifies the intended function or purpose of the invention, but if, say, a 
perpetual motion machine is claimed merely as an article having a 
particular specified construction, then an objection is made under Art. 83 
(see F-III, 3). 
2. Method of testing 
Methods of testing generally are regarded as inventions susceptible of 
industrial application and therefore patentable if the test is applicable to the 
improvement or control of a product, apparatus or process which is itself 
susceptible of industrial application. In particular, the utilisation of test 
animals for test purposes in industry, e.g. for testing industrial products (for 
example for ascertaining the absence of pyrogenetic or allergic effects) or 
phenomena (for example for determining water or air pollution) would be 
patentable. 
3. Industrial application vs. exclusion under Art. 52(2) 
"Susceptibility of industrial application" is not a requirement that overrides 
the restriction of Art. 52(2), e.g. an administrative method of stock control is 
not patentable, having regard to Art. 52(2)(c), even though it could be 
applied to the factory storeroom for spare parts. On the other hand, 
although an invention must be "susceptible of industrial application" and the 
description must indicate, where this is not apparent, the way in which the 
invention is thus susceptible (see F-II, 4.9), the claims need not necessarily 
be restricted to the industrial application(s). 
4. Sequences and partial sequences of genes 
In general it is required that the description of a European patent 
application must, where this is not self-evident, indicate the way in which 
the invention is capable of exploitation in industry. The invention claimed 
must have such a sound and concrete technical basis that the skilled 
person can recognise that its contribution to the art could lead to practical 
exploitation in industry (see T 898/05). In relation to sequences and partial 
sequences of genes, this general requirement is given specific form in that 
the industrial application of a sequence or a partial sequence of a gene 
must be disclosed in the patent application. A mere nucleic acid sequence 
without 
indication 
of 
a 
function 
is 
not 
a 
patentable 
invention 
Art. 57 
Rule 42(1)(f) 
Rule 29(3) 
Part G – Chapter III-2 

 
 
(EU Dir. 98/44/EC, rec. 23). In cases where a sequence or partial sequence 
of a gene is used to produce a protein or a part of a protein, it is necessary 
to specify which protein or part of a protein is produced and what function 
this protein or part of a protein performs. Alternatively, when a nucleotide 
sequence is not used to produce a protein or part of a protein, the function 
to be indicated could e.g. be that the sequence exhibits a certain 
transcription promoter activity. 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-1 
 
Chapter IV – State of the art 
1. General remarks and definition 
An invention is "considered to be new if it does not form part of the state of 
the art". The "state of the art" is defined as "everything made available to 
the public by means of a written or oral description, by use, or in any other 
way, before the date of filing of the European patent application". The width 
of this definition is to be noted. There are no restrictions whatever as to the 
geographical location where or the language or manner in which the 
relevant information was made available to the public; also no age limit is 
stipulated for the documents or other sources of the information. There are, 
however, certain specific exclusions (see G-V). However, since the "state of 
the art" available to the examiner will mainly consist of the documents listed 
in the search report, G-IV, 3 to 6, deals with the question of public 
availability only in relation to written description (either alone or in 
combination with an earlier oral description or use). 
The principles to be applied in determining whether other kinds of prior art 
(which could be introduced into the proceedings e.g. by a third party under 
Art. 115) have been made available to the public are set out in 
G-IV, 7.1 to 7.4. 
For the examination of the novelty of claimed subject-matter, see G-VI. 
A written description, i.e. a document, is regarded as made available to the 
public if, at the relevant date, it was possible for members of the public to 
gain knowledge of the content of the document and there was no bar of 
confidentiality restricting the use or dissemination of such knowledge. For 
instance, German utility models ("Gebrauchsmuster") are already publicly 
available as of their date of entry in the Register of utility models 
("Eintragungstag"), which precedes the date of announcement in the Patent 
Bulletin ("Bekanntmachung im Patentblatt"). The search report also cites 
documents in which doubts with regard to the fact of public availability (for 
"in-house state of the art", see F-II, 4.3) and doubts concerning the precise 
date of publication (see B-VI, 5.6 and G-IV, 7.5) of a document have not, or 
not fully, been removed (see B-VI, 5.6 and G-IV, 7.5). 
If the applicant contests the public availability or assumed date of 
publication of the cited document, the examiner needs to consider whether 
to investigate the matter further. If the applicant shows sound reasons for 
doubting whether the document forms part of the "state of the art" in 
relation to the application and any further investigation does not produce 
evidence sufficient to remove that doubt, the examiner does not pursue the 
matter further. The only other problem likely to arise for the examiner is 
where: 
(i) 
a document reproduces an oral description (e.g. a public lecture) or 
gives an account of a prior use (e.g. display at a public exhibition); 
and 
Art. 54(1) and (2) 
Art. 52(1) 
Part G – Chapter IV-2 

 
 
(ii) 
only the oral description or lecture was publicly available before the 
"date of filing" of the European application, the document itself being 
published on or after this date. 
In such cases, the examiner starts with the assumption that the document 
gives a true account of the earlier lecture, display or other event and 
therefore regards the earlier event as forming part of the "state of the art". 
If, however, the applicant gives sound reasons for contesting the truth of 
the account given in the document then again the examiner does not 
pursue the matter further. 
2. 
Enabling disclosure 
Subject-matter can only be regarded as having been made available to the 
public, and therefore as comprised in the state of the art pursuant to 
Art. 54(1), if the information given is sufficient to enable the skilled person, 
at the relevant date (see G-VI, 3) and taking into account the common 
general knowledge in the field at that time, to practise the technical 
teaching which is the subject of the disclosure (see T 26/85, T 206/83 and 
T 491/99). 
Where a prior-art document discloses subject-matter which is relevant to 
the novelty and/or inventive step of the claimed invention, the disclosure of 
that document must be such that the skilled person can reproduce that 
subject-matter 
using 
common 
general 
knowledge 
(see G-VII, 3.1). 
Subject-matter does not necessarily belong to the common general 
knowledge simply because it has been disclosed in the state of the art: in 
particular, if the information can only be obtained after a comprehensive 
search, it cannot be considered to belong to the common general 
knowledge and cannot be used to complete the disclosure (see T 206/83). 
For example, a document discloses a chemical compound (identified by 
name or by structural formula), indicating that the compound may be 
produced by a process defined in the document itself. The document, 
however, does not indicate how to obtain the starting materials and/or 
reagents used in the process. If the skilled person moreover cannot obtain 
these starting materials or reagents on the basis of common general 
knowledge (e.g. from text books), the document is insufficiently disclosed 
with respect to that compound. Hence, it is not considered to belong to the 
state of the art according to Art. 54(2) (at least in as far as it relates to that 
compound) and consequently it does not prejudice the patentability of the 
claimed invention. 
If, on the other hand, the skilled person knows how to obtain the starting 
materials and reagents (e.g. they are commercially available, or are 
well-known and appear in reference text books), the document is 
sufficiently disclosed with respect to the compound and therefore belongs 
to the state of the art according to Art. 54(2). The examiner can then validly 
rely upon this document to raise objections against the claimed invention. 
3. 
Date of filing or priority date as effective date 
For the purposes of Art. 54(2) and (3), the date of priority counts as the 
date of filing for both the European application being examined and 
Art. 89 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-3 
 
conflicting European applications under Art. 54(3), on condition that the 
respective priority is valid (Art. 89). Different claims, or alternative 
subject-matters claimed in one claim, may have different effective dates, 
i.e. the date of filing or (one of) the claimed priority date(s). The question of 
novelty must be considered against each claim (or part of a claim). The 
state of the art in relation to one claim or one part of a claim may include 
matter, e.g. an intermediate document (see B-X, 9.2.4), which cannot be 
cited against another claim or another alternative subject-matter 
encompassed by the same claim because it has an earlier effective date. 
The priority right of the application being examined or the patent being 
opposed may also be lost as a result of failure to provide a translation of 
the priority document when requested in accordance with Rule 53(3) 
(see A-III, 6.8 and subsections). 
Of course, if all the matter in the state of the art was made available to the 
public before the date of the earliest priority document, the examiner need 
not (and must not) be concerned with the allocation of effective dates. 
If the applicant files missing parts of the description, or drawings 
(see A-II, 5.1), late under Rule 56, the accorded date of the application is 
the date of filing of these missing elements under Rule 56(2) (see A-II, 5.3) 
unless they are completely contained in the priority document and the 
requirements given in Rule 56(3) are satisfied (see A-II, 5.4), in which case 
the original filing date is maintained. The date of the application as a whole 
is thus either the date of filing of the missing elements or the original filing 
date. In the case of erroneously filed documents, the same applies if the 
applicant files a correct description, claims or drawings, or parts thereof, 
under Rule 56a (see A-II, 6). 
Claims filed in response to a communication under Rule 58 do not result in 
a change in the filing date of the application (see A-III, 15), as they are 
considered as amendments to the application as filed (see H-IV, 2.2.4). 
4. Documents in a non-official language 
If the applicant 
(i) 
disputes the relevance of a document in a non-official language cited 
in the search report (for procedure at the search stage, 
see B-X, 9.1.2 and 9.1.3), and 
(ii) 
gives specific reasons, 
the examiner needs to consider whether, in the light of these reasons and 
of the other prior art available, it is justified to pursue the matter. If so, the 
examiner must obtain a translation of the document (or merely the relevant 
part of it if that can be easily identified). If, after the translation, the 
document remains relevant, the examiner sends a copy of the translation to 
the applicant with the next official communication. 
Rule 56 
Rule 56a 
Rule 58 
Part G – Chapter IV-4 

 
 
The requirement to provide a translation of a document in a non-official 
language also applies if the applicant is proficient in the language 
concerned. The translation enables the boards of appeal to examine 
whether the examining division's decision was justified (T 655/13). 
4.1 Machine translations 
In order to overcome the language barrier constituted by a document in an 
unfamiliar non-official language, it might be appropriate for the examiner to 
rely on a machine translation of said document (see T 991/01), which is 
sent to the applicant (see B-X, 9.1.3). If only part of the translated 
document is relevant, the particular passage relied upon must be identified 
(see B-XI, 3.2). A translation has to serve the purpose of rendering the 
meaning of the text in a familiar language (see B-X, 9.1.3). Therefore mere 
grammatical or syntactical errors which have no impact on the possibility of 
understanding the content do not hinder its qualification as a translation 
(see T 287/98). 
A general statement that machine translations as such cannot be trusted is 
not sufficient to invalidate the probatory value of the translation. If a party 
objects to the use of a specific machine translation, that party bears the 
burden of adducing evidence (in the form of, for instance, an improved 
translation of the whole or salient parts of the document) showing the 
extent to which the quality of the machine translation is defective and 
should therefore not be relied upon. 
When the party provides substantiated reasoning for questioning the 
objections raised based on the translated text, the examiner must take 
these reasons into account, similarly to when the publication date is 
questioned (see G-IV, 7.5.3). 
5. 
Conflict with other European applications 
5.1 State of the art pursuant to Art. 54(3) 
The state of the art also comprises the content of other European 
applications filed or validly claiming a priority date earlier than – but 
published under Art. 93 on or after – the date of filing or valid date of priority 
of the application being examined. The date of priority counts as the date of 
filing for both the European application being examined and conflicting 
European applications under Art. 54(3), on condition that the respective 
priority is valid (Art. 89). Such earlier applications are part of the state of the 
art only when considering novelty and not when considering inventive step. 
By the "content" of a European application is meant the whole disclosure, 
i.e. the description, drawings and claims, including: 
(i) 
any matter explicitly disclaimed (with the exception of disclaimers for 
unworkable embodiments); 
(ii) 
any matter for which an allowable reference (see F-III, 8, penultimate 
paragraph) to other documents is made; and 
(iii) 
prior art in so far as explicitly described. 
Art. 54(3) 
Art. 56 
Art. 85 
Art. 89 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-5 
 
However, the "content" does not include any priority document (the purpose 
of such document being merely to determine to what extent the priority date 
is valid for the disclosure of the European application (see F-VI, 1.2)) nor, in 
view of Art. 85, the abstract (see F-II, 2). 
It is important to note that it is the content of the earlier application as filed 
which is to be considered when applying Art. 54(3). Where an application is 
filed in a non-official language as permitted by Art. 14(2) (see A-VII, 1.1), it 
may happen that matter is erroneously omitted from the translation in the 
language of the proceedings and not published under Art. 93 in that 
language. Even in this case, it is the content of the original text which is 
relevant for the purposes of Art. 54(3). 
5.1.1 Requirements 
Whether a published European application can be a conflicting application 
under Art. 54(3) is determined firstly by its filing date and the date of its 
publication; the former must be before the filing or valid priority date of the 
application under examination, the latter must be on or after that date. If the 
published European application validly claims priority, the priority date 
replaces the filing date (Art. 89) for that subject-matter in the application 
which corresponds to the priority application. If a priority claim was 
abandoned or otherwise lost with effect from a date prior to publication, the 
filing date and not the priority date is relevant, irrespective of whether or not 
the priority claim might have conferred a valid priority right. 
Further it is required that the conflicting application was still pending at its 
publication date (see J 5/81). If the application was withdrawn or otherwise 
lost before the date of publication, but published because the preparations 
for publication had been completed, the publication has no effect under 
Art. 54(3), but only under Art. 54(2). Art. 54(3) must be interpreted as 
referring to the publication of a "valid" application, i.e. a European patent 
application in existence at its publication date. 
Changes taking effect after the date of publication (e.g. withdrawal of a 
designation or withdrawal of the priority claim or loss of the priority right for 
other reasons) do not affect the application of Art. 54(3) (see H-III, 4.2 for 
transitional 
provisions 
concerning 
Art. 54(4) 
EPC 1973 
and 
A-III, 11.1 and 11.3 for transitional arrangements concerning non-payment 
of designation fees for applications filed before 1 April 2009). 
5.1.2 Accorded date of filing and content of the application still 
subject to review 
The prior art considered by the examiner might comprise documents 
(European or international patent applications) for which the accorded date 
of filing and the content of the application on the filing date may still be 
under review before the EPO. This might be the case, for instance, when: 
(i) 
a European patent application contains parts of the description 
and/or drawings filed under Rule 56 or (parts of) claims, description 
and/or drawings filed under Rule 56a, or 
Part G – Chapter IV-6 

 
 
(ii) 
an international patent application contains elements or parts of the 
description, drawings or claims filed under Rule 20.5, 20.5bis or 
20.6 PCT. 
The examiner checks whether a final decision on the accorded date of filing 
and on the content of the application on the filing date has already been 
taken before considering the documents as being state of the art under 
Art. 54(3). The content of the application determined according to Rules 56 
or 56a EPC or Rules 20.5, 20.5bis or 20.6 PCT is considered as the 
content of the application as filed within the meaning of Art. 54(3) EPC. 
Note that under Rule 56a(4) EPC and Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT, the erroneously 
filed application documents or parts remain in the application (see A-II, 6.4 
and PCT-EPO Guidelines A-II, 6.2). 
If the date of filing and/or the content of the disclosure have/has not yet 
finally been determined, the examiner temporarily deals with the documents 
(if relevant for assessing the patentability of the claimed subject-matter) as 
if all application documents and parts thereof had been filed on the date of 
filing initially accorded to the application, revisiting the issue at a later point 
in time. 
5.2 Euro-PCT applications 
The above principles also apply to PCT applications designating EP, but 
with an important difference. Art. 153(5), in conjunction with Rule 165, 
makes it clear that a PCT application is included in the state of the art for 
the purposes of Art. 54(3) if the PCT applicant has paid the required filing 
fee under Rule 159(1)(c) and has supplied the PCT application to the EPO 
in English, French or German (this means that a translation is required 
where the PCT application was published in Japanese, Chinese, Spanish, 
Russian, Korean, Portuguese or Arabic). 
Therefore, it is not required that all conditions for entry into the European 
phase be fulfilled for a Euro-PCT application to be considered a conflicting 
European application under Art. 54(3) EPC. 
5.3 Commonly designated states 
See H-III, 4.2 for the transitional applicability of Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 to 
applications which were pending on 13 December 2007 and patents which 
had already been granted on that date. 
5.4 Double patenting 
As acknowledged by the Enlarged Board, the prohibition on double 
patenting is applicable under Art. 125 (G 4/19). It is a principle of 
procedural law generally recognised in the majority of contracting states 
that two patents cannot be granted to the same applicant with claims 
directed to the same subject-matter. 
In line with that, a European patent application can be refused under 
Art. 97(2) if it claims the same subject-matter as a European patent that 
has been granted to the same applicant and does not form part of the state 
of the art pursuant to Art. 54(2) and (3). This would especially be the case 
in the following typical situations: two applications filed on the same day, 
Art. 153 
Rule 165 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-7 
 
parent and divisional applications, or an application and its priority 
application. 
It is permissible to allow an applicant to proceed with two applications 
having the same description which do not claim the same subject-matter 
(see also T 2461/10). In cases where there are two or more European 
applications from the same applicant designating the same state or states 
and the claims of those applications have the same filing or priority date 
and relate to the same invention, the applicant should be required to 
perform one of the following: amend one or more of the applications in such 
a manner that the subject-matter of the claims of the applications is not 
identical, or withdraw overlapping designations, or choose which one of 
those applications is to proceed to grant. If the applicant does not do so, 
once one of the applications is granted, the other(s) will be refused under 
Art. 97(2) in conjunction with Art. 125 (G 4/19). If the claims of those 
applications are merely partially overlapping, no objection should be raised 
(see T 877/06). Should two applications of the same effective date be 
received from two different applicants, each must be allowed to proceed as 
though the other did not exist. 
6. Conflict with national rights of earlier date 
Where a national right of an earlier date exists in a contracting state 
designated in the application, there are several possibilities of amendment 
open to the applicant. First, that designation may be withdrawn from the 
application for the contracting state of the national right of earlier date. 
Second, for such state, the applicant may file claims which are different 
from the claims for the other designated states (see H-II, 3.3 and H-III, 4.4). 
Third, the applicant can limit the existing set of claims in such a manner 
that the national right of earlier date is no longer relevant. 
In opposition or limitation proceedings, the proprietor may file claims which 
are different from the claims for the other contracting states or limit the 
existing set of claims in such a manner that the national right of earlier date 
is no longer relevant (see H-III, 4.4 and D-X, 10.1). 
In opposition proceedings, the proprietor may also request the revocation of 
the patent for the contracting state of the national right of earlier date (see 
D-I, 3; D-VIII, 1.2.5; E-VIII, 8.4). However, this is not possible in limitation or 
revocation proceedings (see D-X, 3). 
Amendment of the application to take account of prior national rights is 
neither required nor suggested (see also H-III, 4.4). However, if the claims 
have been amended, then amendment of the description and drawings is 
required if necessary to avoid confusion. 
7. State of the art made available to the public "by means of a 
written or oral description, by use, or in any other way" 
7.1 Types of use and instances of state of the art made available in 
any other way 
Use may be constituted by producing, offering, marketing or otherwise 
exploiting a product, or by offering or marketing a process or its application 
Rule 138 
Part G – Chapter IV-8 

 
 
or by applying the process. Marketing may be effected, for example, by 
sale or exchange. 
The state of the art may also be made available to the public in other ways, 
as for example by demonstrating an object or process in specialist training 
courses or on online media platforms. 
Availability to the public in any other way also includes all possibilities 
which technological progress may subsequently offer of making available 
the aspect of the state of the art concerned. 
Instances of public prior use or availability in any other way will typically be 
raised in opposition proceedings. They may rarely arise in examination 
proceedings. 
7.2 Matters to be determined by the division as regards prior use 
When dealing with an allegation that an object or process has been used in 
such a way that it is comprised in the state of the art (prior use), the division 
will have to determine the following details: 
(i) 
the date on which the alleged use occurred, i.e. whether there was 
any instance of use before the relevant date (prior use); 
(ii) 
what has been used, in order to determine the degree of similarity 
between the object used and the subject-matter of the European 
patent; and 
(iii) 
all the circumstances relating to the use, in order to determine 
whether and to what extent it was made available to the public, as for 
example the place of use and the form of use. These factors are 
important in that, for example, the details of a demonstration of a 
manufacturing process in a factory or of the delivery and sale of a 
product may well provide information as regards the possibility of the 
subject-matter having become available to the public. 
On the basis of the submissions and the evidence already available, e.g. 
documents confirming sale, or affidavits related to the prior use, the division 
will first establish the relevance of the alleged prior use. If on the basis of 
this assessment it is of the opinion that the prior use is sufficiently 
substantiated and relevant, and if the prior use is not contested, the division 
may take a decision using the submissions and the evidence already 
available. If the prior use or certain circumstances relating to it are 
contested, the division will need to take further evidence (e.g. hearing 
witnesses or performing an inspection) for those facts which are relevant to 
the case and which cannot yet be considered proven on the basis of the 
evidence already submitted. According to the circumstances of a particular 
case, such further evidence might have to be submitted by the party(ies). 
Evidence is always taken under participation of the party(ies), normally in 
oral proceedings. For details concerning means of evidence see E-IV, 1.2. 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-9 
 
7.2.1 General principles 
Subject-matter is regarded as made available to the public by use or in any 
other way if, at the relevant date, it was possible for members of the public 
to gain knowledge of the subject-matter and there was no bar of 
confidentiality restricting the use or dissemination of such knowledge (see 
also G-IV, 1 with reference to written descriptions). This may, for example, 
arise if an object is unconditionally sold to a member of the public, since the 
buyer thereby acquires unlimited possession of any knowledge which may 
be obtained from the object. Even where in such cases the specific features 
of the object may not be ascertained from an external examination, but only 
by further analysis, those features are nevertheless to be considered as 
having been made available to the public. This is irrespective of whether or 
not particular reasons can be identified for analysing the composition or 
internal structure of the object. These specific features only relate to the 
intrinsic features. Extrinsic characteristics, which are only revealed when 
the product is exposed to interaction with specifically chosen outside 
conditions, e.g. reactants or the like, in order to provide a particular effect or 
result or to discover potential results or capabilities, therefore point beyond 
the product per se as they are dependent on deliberate choices being 
made. Typical examples are the first or further application as a 
pharmaceutical 
product 
of 
a 
known 
substance 
or 
composition 
(see Art. 54(4) and (5)) and the use of a known compound for a particular 
purpose, based on a new technical effect (see G 2/88). Thus, such 
characteristics cannot be considered as already having been made 
available to the public (see G 1/92). T 1833/14 contains an example where 
a commercially available product was found by the board not to have been 
made available to the public as the skilled person was not able to 
reproduce it without undue burden, i.e. the alleged public prior use did not 
amount to an enabling disclosure. 
If, on the other hand, an object could be seen in a given place (a factory, for 
example) to which members of the public not bound to secrecy, including 
persons with sufficient technical knowledge to ascertain the specific 
features of the object, had access, all knowledge which an expert was able 
to gain from a purely external examination is to be regarded as having been 
made available to the public. In such cases, however, all concealed 
features which could be ascertained only by dismantling or destroying the 
object will not be deemed to have been made available to the public. 
7.2.2 Agreement on secrecy 
The basic principle to be adopted is that subject-matter has not been made 
available to the public by use or in any other way if there is an express or 
tacit agreement on secrecy which has not been broken. 
In order to establish whether there is a tacit agreement, the division must 
consider the particular circumstances of the case especially whether one or 
more parties involved in the prior use had an objectively recognisable 
interest in maintaining secrecy. If only some of the parties had such an 
interest, it must be established if the other parties implicitly accepted to act 
accordingly. For example, this is the case when the other parties could be 
expected to maintain secrecy in accordance with the usual business 
practice in the relevant industry. For establishing a tacit agreement 
Part G – Chapter IV-10 

 
 
important aspects to be considered are, inter alia, the commercial 
relationship between the parties and the exact object of the prior use. The 
following may be indicators of a tacit secrecy agreement: A parent 
company – subsidiary relationship, a relationship of good faith and trust, a 
joint venture, the delivery of test specimens. The following may be 
indicators of the absence of such an agreement: An ordinary commercial 
transaction, the sale of parts for serial production. 
As a rule, the general standard "balance of probabilities" applies. However, 
if practically all evidence lies within the power of the party bearing the 
burden of proof, the facts must be proven beyond reasonable doubt. For 
example, an opponent alleging that subject-matter was made available 
without any express or tacit agreement on secrecy must substantiate and, if 
contested, convincingly prove the circumstances from which public 
availability can be derived (e.g. ordinary sale to a customer, parts supplied 
for serial production). The proprietor can challenge this by demonstrating 
inconsistencies and gaps in the chain of proof or by substantiating facts 
from which secrecy can be derived (e.g. joint development, samples for test 
purposes). If these elements lead to reasonable doubts as to public 
availability, public prior use has not been established. 
For the particular case of a non-prejudicial disclosure arising from an 
evident abuse in relation to the applicant, see G-IV, 7.3.2 and G-V. 
7.2.3 Use on non-public property 
As a general rule, use on non-public property, for example in factories and 
barracks, is not considered as use made available to the public, because 
company employees and soldiers are usually bound to secrecy, save in 
cases where the objects or processes used are exhibited, explained or 
shown to the public in such places, or where specialists not bound to 
secrecy are able to recognise their essential features from the outside. 
Clearly the above-mentioned "non-public property" does not refer to the 
premises of a third party to whom the object in question was unconditionally 
sold or the place where the public could see the object in question or 
ascertain features of it (see the examples in G-IV, 7.2.1 above). 
7.2.4 Example of the accessibility of objects used 
A press for producing light building (hard fibre) boards was installed in a 
factory shed. Although the door bore the notice "Unauthorised persons not 
admitted", customers (in particular dealers in building materials and clients 
who were interested in purchasing light building boards) were given the 
opportunity of seeing the press although no form of demonstration or 
explanation was given. An obligation to secrecy was not imposed as, 
according to witnesses, the company did not consider such visitors as a 
possible source of competition. These visitors were not genuine specialists, 
i.e. they did not manufacture such boards or presses, but were not entirely 
laymen either. In view of the simple construction of the press, the essential 
features of the invention concerned were bound to be evident to anyone 
observing it. There was therefore a possibility that these customers, and in 
particular the dealers in building materials, would recognise these essential 
features of the press and, as they were not bound to secrecy, they would 
be free to communicate this information to others. 
Art. 55(1)(a) 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-11 
 
7.2.5 Example of the inaccessibility of a process 
The subject of the patent concerns a process for the manufacture of a 
product. As proof that this process had been made available to the public 
by use, a similar already known product was asserted to have been 
produced by the process claimed. However, it could not be clearly 
ascertained, even after an exhaustive examination, by which process it had 
been produced. 
7.3 State of the art made available by means of oral description 
7.3.1 Cases of oral description 
The state of the art is made available to the public by oral description when 
facts are unconditionally brought to the knowledge of members of the 
public, such as in the course of a conversation or a lecture or by means of 
television, podcast or sound reproduction equipment. 
7.3.2 Non-prejudicial oral description 
The state of the art will not be affected by oral descriptions made by and to 
persons who were bound to, and preserved, secrecy, nor by an oral 
disclosure which was made no earlier than six months before the filing of 
the European patent application and which derives directly or indirectly 
from an evident abuse in relation to the applicant or that party's legal 
predecessor. In determining whether evident abuse has occurred, 
note G-V, 3. 
7.3.3 Matters to be determined by the division in cases of oral 
description 
Once again, in such cases the following details will have to be determined: 
(i) 
when the oral description took place; 
(ii) 
what was described orally; and 
(iii) 
whether the oral description was made available to the public; this 
will also depend on the type of oral description (conversation, lecture) 
and on the place at which the description was given (public meeting, 
factory hall; see also G-IV, 7.2(iii)). 
7.3.4 Standard of proof 
Unlike a written document, the contents of which are fixed and can be read 
again and again, an oral presentation is ephemeral. Therefore, the 
standard of proof for ascertaining the content of an oral disclosure is high. 
Whether the amount of evidence provided is sufficient to establish the 
content of the oral disclosure based on this standard of proof has to be 
evaluated on a case-by-case basis and depends on the quality of the 
evidence in each case. However, evidence from the lecturer alone usually 
does not provide a sufficient basis for determining the content of the oral 
disclosure. 
Art. 54(2) 
Art. 55(1)(a) 
Part G – Chapter IV-12 

 
 
7.4 State of the art made available to the public in writing and/or by 
any other means 
For this state of the art, details equivalent to those defined in G-IV, 7.3.3 
have to be determined if they are not clear from the written or other 
disclosure itself or if they are contested by a party. 
If information is made available by means of a written description and use 
or by means of a written and oral description, but only the use or the oral 
description is made available before the relevant date, then in accordance 
with G-IV, 1, the subsequently published written description may be 
deemed to give a true account of that oral description or use unless the 
proprietor of the patent can give good reason why this is not the case. In 
this case, the opponent must adduce proof to the contrary in respect of the 
reasons given by the proprietor of the patent. Caution must be exercised 
when considering the type of evidence presented to substantiate the 
content of an oral description. For example, a report of a lecture written by 
the actual person who delivered the talk may not be an accurate account of 
what was in fact conveyed to the public. Similarly, a script from which the 
lecturer purportedly read may not actually have been completely and 
comprehensibly read (see T 1212/97). 
In opposition, if the publication date of a document originating from the 
opponent is in dispute, the opponent must prove that date beyond 
reasonable doubt. However, if the document is a brochure for advertising, it 
must be taken into account that such brochures are not normally kept 
secret for long after printing (T 2451/13, T 804/05, T 743/89). 
7.5 Internet disclosures 
As a matter of principle, disclosures on the internet form part of the state of 
the art according to Art. 54(2). Information disclosed on the internet or in 
online databases is considered to be publicly available as of the date the 
information was publicly posted. Internet websites often contain highly 
relevant technical information. Certain information may even be available 
only on the internet from such websites. This includes, for example, online 
manuals and tutorials for software products (such as video games) or other 
products with a short life cycle. Hence for the sake of a valid patent it is 
often crucial to cite publications only obtainable from such internet 
websites. 
7.5.1 Establishing the publication date 
Establishing a publication date has two aspects. It must be assessed 
separately whether a given date is indicated correctly and whether the 
content in question was indeed made available to the public as of that date. 
The nature of the internet can make it difficult to establish the actual date 
on which information was made available to the public: for instance, not all 
web pages mention when they were published. Also, websites are easily 
updated, yet most do not provide any archive of previously displayed 
material, nor do they display records which enable members of the public – 
including examiners – to establish precisely what was published and when. 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-13 
 
Neither restricting access to a limited circle of people (e.g. by password 
protection) nor requiring payment for access (analogous to purchasing a 
book or subscribing to a journal) prevent a web page from forming part of 
the state of the art. It is sufficient if the web page is in principle available 
without any bar of confidentiality. 
Finally, it is theoretically possible to manipulate the date and content of an 
internet disclosure (as it is with traditional documents). However, in view of 
the sheer size and redundancy of the content available on the internet, it is 
considered very unlikely that an internet disclosure discovered by an 
examiner has been manipulated. Consequently, unless there are specific 
indications to the contrary, the date can be accepted as being correct. 
7.5.2 Standard of proof 
When an internet document is cited against an application or patent, the 
same facts are to be established as for any other piece of evidence, 
including standard paper publications (see G-IV, 1). This evaluation is 
made according to the principle of "free evaluation of evidence" (see 
T 482/89 and T 750/94). That means that each piece of evidence is given 
an appropriate weight according to its probative value, which is evaluated in 
view of the particular circumstances of each case. The standard for 
assessing these circumstances is the balance of probabilities. According to 
this standard, it is not sufficient that the alleged fact (e.g. the publication 
date) is merely probable; the examining division must be convinced that it is 
correct. It does mean, however, that proof beyond reasonable doubt ("up to 
the hilt") of the alleged fact is not required. 
The publication dates of internet disclosures submitted by a party to 
opposition proceedings are assessed according to the same principles as 
are applied in examination proceedings, i.e. they are assessed in view of 
the specific circumstances of the case. In particular, the timing of the 
submission as well as the interests of the party submitting the disclosure 
are to be taken into account. 
In many cases, internet disclosures contain an explicit publication date 
which is generally considered reliable. Such dates are accepted at face 
value, and the burden of proof will be on the applicant to show otherwise. 
Circumstantial evidence may be required to establish or confirm the 
publication date (see G-IV, 7.5.4). If the examiner comes to the conclusion 
that – on the balance of probabilities – it has been established that a 
particular document was available to the public at a particular date, this 
date is used as publication date for the purpose of examination. 
7.5.3 Burden of proof 
It is a general principle that, when raising objections, the burden of proof 
lies initially with the examiner. This means that objections must be 
reasoned and substantiated, and must show that, on the balance of 
probabilities, the objection is well-founded. If this is done, it is then up to the 
applicant to prove otherwise – the burden of proof shifts to the applicant. 
If an applicant provides reasons for questioning the alleged publication date 
of an internet disclosure, the examiner will have to take these reasons into 
Part G – Chapter IV-14 

 
 
account. If the examiner is no longer convinced that the disclosure forms 
part of the state of the art, this disclosure will not be used further as prior art 
against the application unless the examiner is able to present further 
evidence to maintain the disputed publication date. 
The later the examiner sets out to obtain such evidence, the more difficult it 
may become. The examiner has to judge whether it is worth spending a 
short amount of time at the search stage to find further evidence in support 
of the publication date. 
If an applicant refutes the publication date of an internet disclosure with no 
reasoning or merely with generic statements about the reliability of internet 
disclosures, this argument will be given minimal weight and is therefore 
unlikely to sway the examiner's opinion. 
While the dates and content of internet disclosures can be taken at face 
value, there are of course differing degrees of reliability. The more reliable 
a disclosure, the harder it will be for the applicant to prove that it is 
incorrect. The following sections look at the reliability of various popular 
types of internet disclosure. 
7.5.3.1 Technical journals 
Of particular importance for examiners are online technical journals from 
scientific publishers (e.g. IEEE, Springer, Derwent). The reliability of these 
journals is the same as that of traditional paper journals, i.e. very high. 
It should be noted that the internet publication of a particular issue of a 
journal may be earlier than the date of publication of the corresponding 
paper version. Furthermore, some journals pre-publish on the internet 
manuscripts which have been submitted to them, but which have not yet 
been published, and in some cases before they have even been approved 
for paper publication (for example, the "Geophysics" journal). If the journal 
then does not approve the manuscript for publication, this pre-publication of 
the manuscript may be the only disclosure of its content. Examiners must 
also remember that the pre-published manuscript may differ from the final, 
published version. 
Where the given publication date of an online journal publication is too 
vague (e.g. only the month and year is known), and the most pessimistic 
possibility (the last day of the month) is too late, the examiner may request 
the exact publication date. Such a request may be made directly through a 
contact form that the publisher may offer on the internet, or via the EPO 
library. 
7.5.3.2 Other "print equivalent" publications 
Many sources other than scientific publishers are generally deemed to 
provide reliable publication dates. These include for example publishers of 
newspapers or periodicals, or television or radio stations. Academic 
institutions (such as academic societies or universities), international 
organisations (such as the European Space Agency ESA), public 
organisations (such as ministries or public research agencies) or 
standardisation bodies also typically fall into this category. 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-15 
 
Some universities host so-called eprint archives to which authors submit 
reports on research results in electronic form before they are submitted or 
accepted for publication by a conference or journal. In fact, some of these 
reports are never published anywhere else. The most prominent such 
archive is known as arXiv.org (arxiv.org, hosted by the Cornell University 
Library), but several others exist, e.g. the Cryptology eprint archive 
(eprint.iacr.org, hosted by the International Association for Cryptology 
Research). Some such archives crawl the internet to automatically retrieve 
publications which are publicly available from researchers' web pages, such 
as CiteseerX (citeseerx.ist.psu.edu hosted by Pennsylvania State 
University). 
Companies, organisations or individuals use the internet to publish 
documents that had previously been published on paper. These include 
manuals for software products such as video games, handbooks for 
products such as mobile phones, product catalogues or price lists and 
white papers on products or product families. Evidently, most of these 
documents address the public – e.g. actual or potential customers – and 
are thus meant for publication. Hence the date given can be taken as a 
date of publication. 
7.5.3.3 Non-traditional publications 
The internet is also used to exchange and publish information in ways 
which did not exist before, via, for example, Usenet discussion groups, 
blogs, email archives of mailing lists or wiki pages. Documents obtained 
from such sources also constitute prior art, although it may be more 
involved to establish their publication date, and their reliability may vary. 
The content of a transmitted email cannot be considered to be public 
merely for the reason that it could have been intercepted (T 2/09). 
Computer-generated timestamps (usually seen, for example, on blogs, 
Usenet or the version history available from wiki pages) can be considered 
as reliable publication dates. While such dates could have been generated 
by an imprecise computer clock, this should be weighed against the fact 
that in general many internet services rely on accurate timing and will often 
stop functioning if time and date are incorrect. In the absence of indications 
to the contrary, the frequently used "last modified" date can be treated as 
the publication date. 
7.5.4 Disclosures which have no date or an unreliable date 
Where an internet disclosure is relevant for examination but does not give 
any explicit indication of the publication date in the text of the disclosure, or 
if an applicant has shown that a given date is unreliable, the examiner may 
try to obtain further evidence to establish or confirm the publication date. 
Specifically, the examiner may consider using the following information: 
(a) 
Information relating to a web page available from an internet 
archiving service. The most prominent such service is the Internet 
Archive accessible through the so-called "Wayback Machine" 
(archive.org). The fact that the Internet Archive is incomplete does 
not detract from the credibility of the data it does archive. It is also 
Part G – Chapter IV-16 

 
 
noted that legal disclaimers relating to the accuracy of any supplied 
information are routinely used on websites (even respected sources 
of information such as Espacenet or IEEE), and these disclaimers 
are not to be taken to reflect negatively on the websites' actual 
accuracy. 
(b) 
Timestamp information relating to the history of modifications applied 
to a file or web page (for example, as available for wiki pages such 
as Wikipedia and in version control systems as used for distributed 
software development). 
(c) 
Computer-generated timestamp information as available from file 
directories or other repositories, or as automatically appended to 
content (e.g. forum messages and blogs). 
(d) 
Indexing dates given to the web page by search engines (see also 
T 1961/13). These will be later than the actual publication date of the 
disclosure, since the search engines take some time to index a new 
website. 
(e) 
Information relating to the publication date embedded in the internet 
disclosure itself. Date information is sometimes hidden in the 
programming used to create the website but is not visible in the web 
page as it appears in the browser. Examiners may, for example, 
consider the use of computer forensic tools to retrieve such dates. In 
order to allow a fair evaluation of the accuracy of the date by both the 
applicant and the examiner, these dates can be used only if the 
examiner knows how they were obtained and can communicate this 
to the applicant. 
(f) 
Information about replication of the disclosure at several sites (mirror 
sites) or in several versions. 
It may also be possible to make enquiries with the owner or the author of 
the website when trying to establish the publication date to a sufficient 
degree of certainty. The probative value of statements so obtained will have 
to be assessed separately. 
If no date can be obtained (other than the date of retrieval by the examiner, 
which will be too late for the application in question), the disclosure cannot 
be used as prior art during examination. If a publication, although undated, 
is highly relevant to the invention and can therefore be considered to be of 
interest to the applicant or third parties, it may be cited in the search report 
as an "L" document. The search report and the written opinion must explain 
why this document was cited. Citing the disclosure will also make it citable 
against future applications, using the date of retrieval as the date of 
publication. 
7.5.5 Problematic cases 
Web pages are sometimes divided into frames the content of which is 
drawn from different sources. Each of these frames may have its own 
publication date which may have to be checked. In an archiving system, for 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-17 
 
instance, it may happen that one frame contains the archived information 
with an old publishing date whereas other frames contain commercials 
generated at the time of retrieval. The examiner must ensure that the right 
publication date is used, i.e. that the cited publication date refers to the 
intended content. 
When a document retrieved from the Internet Archive contains links, there 
is no guarantee that the links point to documents archived on the same 
date. It may even happen that the link does not point to an archived page at 
all but to the current version of the web page. This may in particular be the 
case for linked images, which are often not archived. It may also happen 
that archived links do not work at all. 
Some internet addresses (URLs) are not persistent, i.e. they are designed 
to work only during a single session. Long URLs with seemingly random 
numbers and letters are indicative of these. The presence of such a URL 
does not prevent the disclosure being used as prior art, but it does mean 
that the URL will not work for other people (e.g. for the applicant at the time 
of receipt of the search report). For non-persistent URLs, or if, for other 
reasons, it is considered prudent, the examiner indicates how that specific 
URL is arrived at from the main home page of the respective website 
(i.e. which links were followed, or which search terms were used). 
7.5.6 Technical details and general remarks 
When printing a web page, care must be taken that the complete URL is 
clearly legible. The same applies to the relevant publication date on a web 
page. 
It has to be borne in mind that publication dates may be given in different 
formats, especially in either the European format dd/mm/yyyy, the US 
format mm/dd/yyyy or the ISO format yyyy/mm/dd. Unless the format is 
explicitly indicated, it will be impossible to distinguish between the 
European format and the US format for days 1-12 of each month. 
If a publication date is close to the relevant priority date, the time zone of 
publication may be crucial to interpret a publication date. 
The examiner must always indicate the date on which the web page was 
retrieved. When citing internet disclosures, the examiner must explain the 
prior-art status of the document, e.g.: 
(i) 
how and where the publication date was obtained (for example, that 
the eight digits in the URL represent the date of archiving in the 
format yyyymmdd), and 
(ii) 
any other relevant information (for example, where two or more 
related documents are cited, how they are related, indicating for 
instance that following link "xyz" on the first document leads to the 
second document). 
When citing a multimedia disclosure found on the internet, such as a video 
or podcast, the division will request capture and storage of electronic 
Part G – Chapter IV-18 

 
 
evidence suitable to prove its content and availability to the public. If the 
disclosure later ceases to be available on the internet, such evidence will 
be made available to the parties to the proceedings concerned on request 
(see also B-X, 11.6). 
7.6 Standards and standard preparatory documents 
Standards define sets of characteristics or qualities for products, 
processes, services or materials (e.g. the properties of an interface) and 
are usually developed by Standards Development Organisations (SDOs) by 
consensus amongst the relevant economic stakeholders. 
Final standards themselves in principle form part of the state of the art 
under Art. 54(2), although there are important exceptions. One of these 
relates to private standards consortia (e.g. in the field of CD-ROM, DVD 
and Blu-ray discs), which do not publish the final standards but make them 
available to the interested circles subject to acceptance of a non-disclosure 
agreement (categorically forbidding the recipients of the documents to 
disclose their content). 
Before an SDO reaches agreement on the establishment or further 
development of a standard, various types of preparatory documents are 
submitted and discussed. These preparatory documents are treated like 
any other written or oral disclosures, i.e. in order to qualify as prior art they 
must have been made available to the public prior to the filing or priority 
date without any bar of confidentiality. Thus if a standard preparatory 
document is cited against an application during search or examination, the 
same facts are to be established as for any other piece of evidence 
(see G-IV, 1 and T 738/04). 
The existence of an explicit confidentiality obligation must be determined 
case by case on the basis of the documents allegedly setting forth this 
obligation (see T 273/02 and T 738/04). These may be general guidelines, 
directives or principles of the SDO concerned, licensing terms or a 
Memorandum of Understanding resulting from interaction between the 
SDOs and their members. In case of a general confidentiality clause, 
i.e. one that is not indicated on or in the relevant preparatory document 
itself, it must be established that the general confidentiality obligation 
actually extended to the document in question until the relevant point in 
time. This does not however require the document itself to be explicitly 
marked as confidential (see T 273/02). 
If the preparatory documents are available in the EPO's in-house 
databases or at freely accessible sources (for example, on the internet), the 
examiner is allowed to cite them in the search report and to refer to them 
during the procedure. The public availability of the documents, if at all 
necessary, may be further investigated during examination and opposition 
in accordance with the principles set out above. 
While documents in the EPO's in-house databases are regarded as being 
available to the public, no general indication can be given for documents 
obtained from other sources. 
 

Part G – Chapter IV-19 
 
Norms and standards are comparable with trade marks in that their content 
can vary with time. Therefore, they have to be identified properly by their 
version number and publication date (see also F-III, 7, F-IV, 4.8 and 
H-IV, 2.2.9). 
8. Cross-references between prior-art documents 
If a document (the "primary" document) refers explicitly to another 
document (the "secondary" document) as providing more detailed 
information on certain features, the teaching of the latter is to be regarded 
as incorporated into the primary document if the document was available to 
the public on the publication date of the primary document (see T 153/85) 
(for the state of the art pursuant to Art. 54(3), see G-IV, 5.1 and F-III, 8, 
penultimate paragraph). The relevant date for novelty purposes, however, 
is always the date of the primary document (see G-IV, 3). 
9. Errors in prior-art documents 
Errors may exist in prior-art documents. 
When a potential error is detected, three situations may arise depending on 
whether the skilled person, using general knowledge, 
(i) 
can directly and unambiguously derive from the prior art document 
that it contains an error and what the only possible correction should 
be; 
(ii) 
can directly and unambiguously derive from the prior art document 
that it contains an error, but is able to identify more than one possible 
correction; or 
(iii) 
cannot directly and unambiguously derive from the prior art 
document that an error has occurred. 
When assessing the relevance of a document to patentability, 
in case (i), the disclosure is considered to contain the correction; 
in case (ii), the disclosure of the passage containing the error is not taken 
into account; 
in case (iii), the literal disclosure is taken into account as is. 
For possible errors concerning compound records in online databases, 
see B-VI, 6.5. For non-enabling disclosures, see G-IV, 2. 
 

Part G – Chapter V-1 
 
Chapter V – Non-prejudicial disclosures 
1. General 
There are two specific instances (and these are the only two) in which a 
prior disclosure of the invention is not taken into consideration as part of the 
state of the art, viz. where the disclosure was due to, or in consequence of: 
(i) 
an evident abuse in relation to the applicant or that party's legal 
predecessor – e.g. the invention was derived from the applicant or 
that party's legal predecessor and disclosed against their wish; or 
(ii) 
the display of the invention by the applicant or that party's legal 
predecessor at an officially recognised international exhibition as 
defined in Art. 55(1)(b). 
2. Time limit 
An essential condition, in both instances G-V, 1(i) and (ii), is that the 
disclosure in point must have taken place not earlier than six months 
preceding the filing of the application. For calculating the six-month period 
the relevant date is that of the actual filing date of the European patent 
application, not the priority date (G 3/98 and G 2/99). 
3. Evident abuse 
Regarding instance G-V, 1(i), the disclosure might be made in a published 
document or in any other way. As a particular instance, the disclosure 
might be made in a European application of earlier priority date. Thus, for 
example, a person B who has been told of A's invention in confidence, 
might apply for a patent for this invention. If so, the disclosure resulting 
from the publication of B's application will not prejudice A's rights provided 
that A has already made an application, or applies within six months of 
such publication. In any event, having regard to Art. 61, B may not be 
entitled to proceed with the application (see A-IV, 2). 
For "evident abuse" to be established, there must be, on the part of the 
person disclosing the invention, either actual intent to cause harm or actual 
or constructive knowledge that harm would or could ensue from this 
disclosure (see T 585/92). This must be proven on the balance of 
probabilities (see T 436/92). 
4. International exhibition 
In instance G-V, 1(ii), the application must be filed within six months of the 
disclosure of the invention at the exhibition if the display is not to prejudice 
the application. Furthermore, the applicant must state, at the time of filing 
the application, that the invention has been so displayed, and must also file 
a supporting certificate within four months, giving the particulars required by 
Rule 25 (see A-IV, 3). The exhibitions recognised are published in the 
Official Journal. 
Art. 55(1) 
Art. 55(1)(a) 
Art. 55(1)(b) 
Art. 55(2) 
Rule 25 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-1 
 
Chapter VI – Novelty 
1. State of the art pursuant to Art. 54(2) 
An invention is considered to be new if it does not form part of the state of 
the art. For a definition of "state of the art", see G-IV, 1. It is to be noted that 
in considering novelty (as distinct from inventive step; see G-VII, 6), it is not 
permissible to combine separate items of prior art together. It is also not 
permissible to combine separate items belonging to different embodiments 
described in one and the same document unless such combination has 
specifically been suggested (see T 305/87). For the specific case of 
selection inventions see G-VI, 7. 
For determining novelty, it has to be decided which subject-matter has 
been made available to the public by a prior-art disclosure and thus forms 
part of the state of the art. In this context, it is not only examples but the 
whole content of the prior-art document that has to be taken into 
consideration.  
Furthermore, any matter explicitly disclaimed (with the exception of 
disclaimers which exclude unworkable embodiments) and prior art 
acknowledged in a document, in so far as explicitly described therein, are 
to be regarded as incorporated in the document. 
It is further permissible to use a dictionary or similar document of reference 
in order to interpret a special term used in a document. 
An unclear term cannot be used to distinguish the invention from the prior 
art and is not allowable under Art. 84 (see F-IV, 4.6.1). 
2. Implicit features or well-known equivalents 
A document takes away the novelty of any claimed subject-matter derivable 
directly and unambiguously from that document including any features 
implicit to a person skilled in the art in what is expressly mentioned in the 
document, e.g. a disclosure of the use of rubber in circumstances where 
clearly its elastic properties are used even if this is not explicitly stated 
takes away the novelty of the use of an elastic material. The limitation to 
subject-matter "derivable directly and unambiguously" from the document is 
important. Thus, when considering novelty, it is not correct to interpret the 
teaching of a document as embracing well-known equivalents which are not 
disclosed in the documents; this is a matter of obviousness. 
3. Relevant date of a prior-art document 
In determining novelty, a prior-art document is to be read as it would have 
been read by a person skilled in the art on its relevant date. By "relevant" 
date is meant the publication date of the prior-art document in the case of a 
previously published document and the date of filing (or priority date, where 
applicable) in the case of a document according to Art. 54(3) 
(see G-IV, 5.1). 
4. Generic disclosure and specific examples 
In considering novelty, it is to be borne in mind that a generic disclosure 
does not usually take away the novelty of any specific example falling 
Part G – Chapter VI-2 

 
 
within the terms of that disclosure, but that a specific disclosure does take 
away the novelty of a generic claim embracing that disclosure, e.g. a 
disclosure of copper takes away the novelty of metal as a generic concept, 
but not the novelty of any metal other than copper, and one of rivets takes 
away the novelty of fastening means as a generic concept, but not the 
novelty of any fastening other than rivets. See also G-VI, 7 in relation to 
selection inventions. 
5. 
Implicit disclosure and parameters 
In the case of a prior-art document, the lack of novelty may be apparent 
from what is explicitly stated in the document itself. Alternatively, it may be 
implicit in the sense that, in carrying out the teaching of the prior-art 
document, the skilled person would inevitably arrive at a result falling within 
the terms of the claim. An objection of lack of novelty of this kind is raised 
by the examiner only where there can be no reasonable doubt as to the 
practical effect of the prior teaching (for a second non-medical use, 
however, see G-VI, 6). 
Situations of this kind may also occur when the claims define the invention, 
or a feature thereof, by parameters (see F-IV, 4.11). It may happen that in 
the relevant prior art a different parameter, or no parameter at all, is 
mentioned. If the known and the claimed products are identical in all other 
respects (which is to be expected if, for example, the starting products and 
the manufacturing processes are identical), then in the first place an 
objection of lack of novelty arises. The burden of proof for an alleged 
distinguishing feature lies with the applicant. No benefit of doubt can be 
accorded if the applicant does not provide evidence in support of the 
allegations (see T 1764/06). If, on the other hand, the applicant is able to 
show, e.g. by appropriate comparison tests, that differences do exist with 
respect to the parameters, it is questionable whether the application 
discloses all the features essential to manufacture products having the 
parameters specified in the claims (Art. 83). 
6. 
Examination of novelty 
In determining novelty of the subject-matter of claims, the examiner must 
have regard to the guidance given in F-IV, 4.5 to 4.21. Particularly for 
claims directed to a physical entity, non-distinctive characteristics of a 
particular intended use are to be disregarded (see F-IV, 4.13.1). For 
example, a claim to a substance X for use as a catalyst would not be 
considered to be novel over the same substance known as a dye unless 
the use referred to implies a particular form of the substance (e.g. the 
presence of certain additives) which distinguishes it from the known form of 
the substance. That is to say, characteristics not explicitly stated, but 
implied by the particular use, are to be taken into account (see the example 
of a "mold for molten steel" in F-IV, 4.13.1). For claims to a first medical 
use, see G-II, 4.2. 
A claim defining a compound as having a certain purity lacks novelty over a 
prior-art disclosure describing the same compound only if the prior art 
discloses the claimed purity at least implicitly, for example by way of a 
method for preparing said compound, the method inevitably resulting in the 
purity as claimed. Such a claim, however, does not lack novelty if the 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-3 
 
disclosure of the prior art needs to be supplemented, for example by 
suitable (further) purification methods allowing the skilled person to arrive at 
the claimed purity. 
6.1 First or further medical use of known products 
Where a substance or composition is already known, it may still be 
patentable under Art. 54(4) if the known substance or composition was not 
previously disclosed for use in a method referred to in Art. 53(c). 
Where a substance or composition is already known to have been used in 
a "first medical use", it may still be patentable under Art. 54(5) for any 
second or further use in a method according to Art. 53(c), provided that 
said use is novel and inventive. 
Art. 54(4) and (5) thus provide for an exception from the general principle 
that product claims can only be obtained for novel products. However, this 
does not mean that product claims for the first and further medical uses 
need not fulfil all other requirements of patentability, especially that of 
inventive step (see T 128/82). 
A claim in the form "Use of substance or composition X for the treatment of 
disease Y..." will be regarded as relating to a method for treatment explicitly 
excluded from patentability under Art. 53(c) and therefore will not be 
accepted. A claim in the form "Substance X for use as a medicament" is 
acceptable, even if X is a known substance, but its use in medicine is not 
known. Likewise, it is acceptable to have a claim in the form "Substance X 
for use in the treatment of disease Y", provided that such a claim involves 
an inventive step over any prior art disclosing the use of X as a 
medicament. 
If an application discloses for the first time a number of distinct surgical, 
therapeutic or diagnostic uses for a known substance or composition, 
normally independent claims each directed to the substance or composition 
for one of the various uses are allowed; i.e. an a priori objection of lack of 
unity of invention is not, as a general rule, raised (see F-V, 7). 
Where the subject-matter of a claim is rendered novel only by a new 
therapeutic use of a medicament, the claim may no longer have the format 
of a so-called "Swiss-type" claim as instituted by decision G 5/83 ("Use of a 
substance or composition X for the manufacture of a medicament for 
therapeutic application Z") if the application has a filing or earliest priority 
date of 29 January 2011 or later (see the notice from the EPO dated 
20 September 2010, OJ EPO 2010, 514). 
Art. 82 
Part G – Chapter VI-4 

 
 
The effect of the different claim formulations on patentability is summarised 
in the table below: 
Examples 
# 
Claim 
Patentable? 
Article 
A 
Use of product X for 
the treatment of 
asthma 
No 
53(c) 
B 
1. Product X for use as 
a medicament 
[X known as 
e.g. herbicide] 
2. Product according to 
claim 1 for use in the 
treatment of asthma 
Yes 
(even if X is a known 
product, but its use in 
medicine is not known) 
Yes 
54(4) 
C 
Product X for use in 
the treatment of 
cancer* 
Yes 
(even if case B is prior 
art, provided that such a 
claim is inventive over B 
and any other prior art) 
54(5) 
D 
Product X for use in 
the treatment of 
leukaemia* 
Yes 
(even if cases B and C 
are prior art, provided 
that D is inventive over B 
and C and any other 
prior art because 
leukaemia is a specific 
type of cancer) 
54(5) 
* Note: The corresponding Swiss-type claims for cases C and D (required 
under EPC 1973) would be "The use of Product X for the manufacture of a 
medicament for the treatment of cancer/leukaemia". 
In cases where an applicant simultaneously discloses more than one 
"subsequent" therapeutic use, claims of the above type directed to these 
different uses are allowable in the one application, but only if they form a 
single general inventive concept (Art. 82). Regarding use claims of the 
above type, it is also to be noted that a mere pharmaceutical effect does 
not necessarily imply a therapeutic application. For instance, the selective 
occupation of a specific receptor by a given substance cannot be 
considered in itself as a therapeutic application; indeed, the discovery that 
a substance selectively binds a receptor, even if representing an important 
piece of scientific knowledge, still needs to find an application in the form of 
a defined, real treatment of a pathological condition in order to make a 
technical contribution to the art and to be considered as an invention 
eligible for patent protection (see T 241/95). See also F-IV, 4.22 for the 
functional definition of a pathological condition. 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-5 
 
A claim in the format of a Swiss-type claim is a purpose-related process 
claim, whereas a claim drafted in accordance with Art. 54(5) is a 
purpose-related product claim. Therefore, such claims have different 
categories. This has the following consequences: 
(i) 
If a parent application has been granted with a Swiss-type claim, 
granting a patent on the basis of the purpose-related product claim in 
its divisional application would not lead to double patenting (T 13/14; 
see also G-IV, 5.4). 
(ii) 
Since a claim to a particular physical activity (e.g. method, process, 
use) confers less protection than a claim to the physical entity per se 
(G 2/88, Reasons 5.1), a Swiss-type claim confers less protection 
than a claim formulated according to Art. 54(5). Therefore a change 
from a Swiss-type claim to a claim drafted in accordance with 
Art. 54(5) contravenes Art. 123(3) (T 1673/11; see also H-IV, 3.4). 
6.1.1 Products that may be claimed for a further medical use 
The scope of protection of use-related product claims under Art. 54(5) is 
limited to the substance or composition in the context of its medical use 
which confers novelty and non-obviousness, if any, on the claimed product.  
This principle applies only to substances and compositions and cannot be 
extended to other products. A claim directed to a device for an intended 
medical use (e.g. pacemaker or implantable chemical sensor for use in ...) 
must be construed as claiming a device which is suitable for that medical 
use (F-IV, 4.13). 
A product qualifies as a "substance or composition" in the sense of 
Art. 54(5) if it is the active agent or ingredient in the specific medical use 
and if the therapeutic effect can be ascribed to its chemical properties (see 
G 5/83 and T 1758/15). For example, consider a filler material which is 
injected between a first tissue targeted for radiation treatment and a second 
sensitive tissue which is desired to be protected from radiation. If the 
shielding effect of the filler material is achieved by a mere mechanical 
displacement of the sensitive tissue relative to the target tissue, due to the 
volume it occupies between the two tissues, the filler material qualifies as a 
device rather than a substance or composition. On the other hand, if the 
filler material produced a radiation-reducing effect on the sensitive tissue 
which could be attributed to its chemical properties, it would be considered 
as a "substance or composition" in the sense of Art. 54(5). 
6.1.2 Therapeutic uses pursuant to Art. 54(5) 
The treatment of a disease with a substance or composition which is 
already known to be used for treating said disease, where the only 
difference from the known treatment is in the dosage regime, is a specific 
further medical use within the meaning of Art. 54(5) (see G 2/08). Thus, 
therapeutic uses of a substance/composition may be based not only on the 
treatment of a different disease but also on the treatment of the same 
disease by a different therapeutic method differing for example in the 
dosage, administration regime, group of subjects or route of administration 
(G 2/08). 
Part G – Chapter VI-6 

 
 
A claim directed to the further therapeutic use of a substance/composition 
must indicate the illness/disease to be treated, the nature of the therapeutic 
compound used for that purpose and, if relevant for establishing novelty 
and inventive step, the subject to be treated. If the further therapeutic use 
relates to a different therapy of the same disease using the same 
substance/composition, the claim must also define all technical features of 
the therapy giving rise to the desired technical effect (G 2/08). 
An independent claim directed to a further therapeutic use of a 
substance/composition which is based on the use of said product in the 
treatment of a different disease must be formulated as follows: 
Substance X 
or 
Composition 
comprising X 
for use 
in a method for the treatment of Y, or 
in the therapy of Y, or 
in a method of treating Y, or 
in a method of therapy of Y, or 
as a medicament defined by its function, 
(e.g. as an anti-inflammatory medicament) 
The presence of the term "for use" is mandatory, to closely adhere to the 
wording of Art. 54(5). 
If the independent claim is directed to a composition, the definition of the 
composition may be inserted before or after the term "for use". For 
example: "Composition comprising X for use in the therapy of Y" or 
"Composition for use in the therapy of Y comprising X". 
If the further therapeutic use is based on the use of the same product in a 
different treatment of the same disease, the independent claim must be 
formulated as follows: 
Substance X 
for use 
or 
Composition 
comprising X 
for use 
in a method for the 
treatment of Y, or 
in the therapy of Y, or 
in a method of 
treating Y, or 
in a method of 
therapy of Y, or 
as a medicament 
defined by its function 
(e.g. as an 
anti-inflammatory 
medicament) 
characterised 
in that/ 
wherein 
other features 
(e.g. the 
substance/ 
composition is 
administered 
topically, three 
times daily...) 
Purpose-related product claims which do not define exclusively (see 
claim 4 in the table below) a medical use excluded from patentability under 
Art. 53(c) are construed as claims directed to a product per se which is 
suitable for the claimed use. 
The table below shows some examples of claims which do not define a 
further medical use within the meaning of Art. 53(c). 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-7 
 
 
... because ... 
1. Substance X or 
Composition 
comprising X in/for 
a method for the 
treatment of Y, or 
the therapy of Y, or 
a method of treating 
Y, or 
a method of therapy 
of Y, or the (topical) 
treatment of Y, or 
the (topical) therapy 
of Y 
without the term "for use" 
it is not evident if the 
claim is directed to the 
product suitable for the 
specified use or if the 
claim is limited by the 
medical use  
2. (Anti-inflammatory) 
medicament, or 
Pharmaceutical 
comprising substance X, 
or Composition 
comprising X 
for topical treatment 
the claim indicates 
neither a therapeutic role 
nor a therapeutic 
application of the claimed 
product. Moreover, 
without the term "for use" 
it is not evident if the 
claim is directed to the 
product suitable for the 
specified use or if the 
claim is limited by the 
medical use 
3. Substance X or 
Composition 
comprising X 
as an 
anti-inflammatory 
agent 
 
without the term "for use" 
it is not evident if the 
claim is directed to the 
product suitable for the 
specified use or if the 
claim is limited by the 
medical use 
4. Substance X or 
Composition 
comprising X 
for use as an 
antifungal 
/antibacterial agent 
the claim does not define 
a specific medical use of 
the claimed product. It 
encompasses 
non-medical uses, 
because antifungal/ 
antibacterial agents are 
also used in e.g. 
agriculture for treating 
plants 
If the prior art discloses either the product per se in a form which could be 
considered suitable for the claimed use, or its first medical application, 
claims 1 to 4 would lack novelty. The novelty objection could be overcome 
by reformulating the claim as described above (first table). 
These amendments may be proposed by the examining division in the 
Rule 71(3) communication without the need to consult the applicant 
beforehand (see C-V, 1.1, point (f)). 
Part G – Chapter VI-8 

 
 
The following are examples of claims which would not be considered novel: 
Example 1 
Composition comprising X for use by topical treatment/application 
It is assumed that a composition comprising X is already known in the prior 
art. 
Reasons for objection: Since the claim fails to identify the specific 
therapeutic indication for X, the feature "for topical treatment/application" 
remains de facto purely illustrative and does not limit the scope of the claim 
to that specific application. 
Furthermore, the term "topical treatment/application" does not necessarily 
relate to use in a method referred to in Art. 53(c) since it could refer to a 
cosmetic treatment. Consequently, the subject-matter of the claimed 
composition would be anticipated if said composition comprising X is 
already known in the prior art. 
Example 2 
Composition comprising X for use in therapy by topical administration 
It is assumed that a composition comprising X is already known in the prior 
art for a medical use. 
Reasons for objection: The mode of administration may be a critical factor 
in a medical treatment and has been considered as a limiting feature, but 
only in relation to a further (specific) medical indication (T 51/93). "Topical 
administration" specifies only the mode of delivery, but does not relate to 
any therapeutic effect obtained thereby. Consequently, since the claim fails 
to identify the specific therapeutic indication, the feature "by topical 
administration" is merely illustrative and not a restrictive technical feature 
capable of establishing novelty. The subject-matter of the claimed 
composition would thus be anticipated if said composition comprising X is 
already known in the prior art for any medical use. 
Example 3 
Product X for use in a method of contraception 
Reasons for objection: Such a claim would not be considered novel over 
the disclosure of product X per se because pregnancy is not a disease. 
This claim can usually be reformulated as a method of contraception using 
product X. Reformulation may not be possible in so far as the contraception 
method involves the personal and private sphere, i.e. it does not fulfil the 
requirement of industrial application (T 74/93). 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-9 
 
6.1.3 Diagnostic uses pursuant to Art. 54(5) 
A suitable formulation of a diagnostic claim according to Art. 54(5) may 
read: 
Substance X 
or 
Composition 
comprising X 
for use in a 
method of 
diagnosis 
"in vivo" 
of disease Y 
The wording "in vivo" limits the scope of the claim to diagnostic methods 
which are excluded from patentability pursuant to Art. 53(c). 
If the independent claim is directed to a composition, the definition of the 
composition may be inserted before or after the term "for use". 
Purpose-related product claims which do not define a diagnostic use 
excluded from patentability under Art. 53(c) are construed as claims 
directed to a product per se which is suitable for the claimed use. 
The following table shows some examples of claims which do not define a 
diagnostic use within the meaning of Art. 53(c): 
1. Substance X or Composition 
comprising X  
for use in the diagnosis of disease Y, 
or for use in the "in vitro"/"ex vivo" 
diagnosis of disease Y 
2. Substance X or Composition 
comprising X 
for use as a contrast agent for imaging 
blood flow 
Claims 1 and 2 would lack novelty over prior art disclosing either the 
product per se in a form which could be considered suitable for the claimed 
use, or its first medical application. 
Claim 1 could be reformulated as "Use of [...] in the "in vitro/ex vivo" 
diagnosis of disease Y". If the application as filed discloses, either explicitly 
or implicitly, that the claimed diagnostic methods are to be carried out 
"in vivo", the wording of claim 1 could also be limited to encompass only 
"in vivo" methods, as described above. 
Claim 2 could be reformulated as "Use of [...] as contrast agent for imaging 
blood flow". 
Claims 1 and 2 could also be reformulated as method claims, e.g. "A 
method for in vitro/ex vivo diagnosing disease Y using substance X [...]" or " 
A method for diagnosing disease Y in a sample by using substance X [...]" 
or "A method of imaging blood flow using substance X [...]". 
These amendments may be proposed by the examining division in the 
Rule 71(3) communication without the need to consult the applicant 
beforehand (see C-V, 1.1, point (f)). 
Part G – Chapter VI-10 

 
 
6.1.4 Surgical uses pursuant to Art. 54(5) 
A claim defining a second surgical use may read "Substance X/ 
Composition 
comprising X 
for 
use 
in 
a method 
of 
intracardiac 
catheterisation as a protector of blood vessel walls". 
If the independent claim is directed to a composition, the definition of the 
composition may be inserted before or after the term "for use". 
Purpose-related product claims which do not define a surgical use excluded 
from patentability under Art. 53(c) are construed as claims directed to a 
product per se which is suitable for the claimed use. 
The following table shows an example of a claim which does not define a 
surgical use within the meaning of Art. 53(c): 
1. Substance X or 
Composition comprising X 
for use in a method for hair removal by 
laser radiation 
The claim would lack novelty over prior art disclosing either the product 
per se in a form which could be considered suitable for the claimed use, or 
its first medical application. 
The claim could be reformulated as "Use of [...] for hair removal by laser 
radiation" or as "Method for removing hair by laser radiation by using 
substance X [...]". 
This amendment may be proposed by the examining division in the 
Rule 71(3) communication without the need to consult the applicant 
beforehand (see C-V, 1.1, point (f)). 
6.1.5 Dependent claims pursuant to Art. 54(5) 
The wording of the dependent claims must clearly reflect their dependency 
on the independent claim (T 2106/10). A suitable formulation may read: 
Substance (X) 
or 
Composition 
(comprising X) 
(according to 
claim #) 
for use in the therapy 
of disease Y 
according to claim # 
or 
for use according to 
claim # 
wherein 
other features 
(e.g. it is 
provided as 
water-soluble 
granulates) 
In the following example, the dependent claim is not correctly formulated 
according to Art. 54(5). 
Claim 1: Composition comprising X for use in the treatment of Y. 
Claim 2: Composition according to claim 1, comprising 5 mg X. 
The category of claim 2 is unclear and the dependency is doubtful. The 
claim appears to depend on a claim directed to a product per se. 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-11 
 
The claim would also lack novelty over prior art disclosing a composition 
comprising 5 mg X, or a first medical application thereof. 
The claim must be reformulated as indicated above by inserting "for use" 
between "Composition" and "according". This amendment may be 
proposed by the examining division in the Rule 71(3) communication 
without the need to consult the applicant beforehand (see C-V, 1.1, 
point (f)). 
6.2 Second non-medical use 
A claim to the use of a known compound for a particular purpose (second 
non-medical use) which is based on a technical effect is interpreted as 
including that technical effect as a functional technical feature. Accordingly, 
said claim is not open to objection under Art. 54(1), provided that such 
technical feature has not previously been made available to the public 
(G 2/88, and G 6/88). The novelty of the use of the known compound for 
the known production of a known product cannot be deduced from a new 
property of the produced product. In such a case, the use of a compound 
for the production of a product has to be interpreted as a process for 
production of the product with the compound. It can be regarded as novel 
only if the process of production as such is novel (see T 1855/06). For 
claims to a second or further medical use, see G-II, 4.2. 
However, a feature of a step in a chemical process which merely serves to 
explain the technical effect obtained is not a functional technical feature 
which could render a claim novel over prior art which discloses the same 
process with the same step which provides the same effect, even if it does 
not comprise a corresponding indication of technical effect. It is rather 
considered to be a discovery (T 151/13). 
7. Selection inventions 
Selection inventions deal with the selection of individual elements, subsets, 
or sub-ranges from a more generic disclosure in the prior art, see also 
G-VI, 5. 
Assessment of the novelty of selection inventions is dependent on the 
number of selections identified compared with the prior art, leading to one 
of the following two scenarios: 
(i) 
One selection identified 
In the case of one single selection, the following scenarios may arise: 
(a) 
The selection is a selection of individual elements or of 
subsets of a larger set. 
A selection of one or more elements from a single list of 
specifically disclosed elements does not confer novelty.  
(b) 
The selection is a selection of a sub-range selected from a 
broader numerical range disclosed in the prior art. Whether the 
Part G – Chapter VI-12 

 
 
selection of a sub-range can be considered novel depends on 
the specific circumstances: 
A claimed selection of a sub-range is not considered novel if 
any specific value disclosed in the prior art falls within the 
claimed range, irrespective of whether the value stems from a 
concrete example or is disclosed as the endpoint of a range. 
A sub-range selected from a broader numerical range of the prior art 
is considered novel if both of the following two criteria are satisfied 
(see T 261/15): 
– the selected sub-range is narrow compared to the known range; 
– the selected sub-range is sufficiently far removed from any specific 
examples disclosed in the prior art. 
The meaning of "narrow" and "sufficiently far removed" has to be 
decided on a case by case basis. 
In this context, it must be assessed whether the skilled person, in the 
light of the teaching of the prior art, would seriously contemplate 
working in the selected sub-range. If it can be fairly assumed that the 
skilled person would do so, the selected sub-range is not novel. For 
this reason, it may not be sufficient to exclude specific 
novelty-destroying values known from the prior-art range to establish 
novelty. 
The concept of "seriously contemplating" is fundamentally different 
from the concept used for assessing inventive step, namely whether 
the skilled person "would have tried, with reasonable expectation of 
success", to bridge the technical gap between a particular piece of 
prior art and a claim whose inventiveness is in question (see 
G-VII, 5.3), because in order to establish anticipation, there cannot 
be such a gap. 
For example, claim 1 defines a range of 3.0-6.0 wt% of a surfactant 
in a liquid detergent composition. D1 discloses a liquid detergent 
composition comprising a surfactant in a general range of 1-30 wt% 
and one concrete example of 25 wt%. The selection of the claimed 
sub-range will be novel since the claimed range is narrow compared 
to the prior-art range but also far removed from the concrete 
example. However, if a concrete example from D1 discloses a value 
of 4.5 wt% of surfactant or if a more preferred range of 5-20 wt% is 
disclosed in D1, then D1 takes away novelty of claim 1. If D1 
discloses an example with 2.8 wt% surfactant instead, it has to be 
assessed if the value 2.8 wt% is sufficiently far removed from the 
claimed range of 3.0-6.0 wt%. This is done by assessing whether the 
skilled person would seriously contemplate working in the claimed 
range. 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-13 
 
In T 1571/15, regarding an alloy defined by its composition, it was 
held that the skilled person would not seriously contemplate working 
in the selected sub-range, despite it falling in the centre region of a 
range disclosed in the prior art document, since said prior art 
document contained a pointer to another region. 
The same principle applies to Markush formulae. For example, a 
claim may define a chemical compound with a substituent being an 
alkyl chain with 5 to 10 carbon atoms. This claim is not new in view of 
a prior-art chemical compound having 8 carbon atoms. For a prior-art 
document disclosing an alkyl chain with an unspecified length and 
one concrete compound having 11 carbon atoms, it has to be 
assessed if the claimed range is sufficiently far removed from the 
known example. 
(ii) 
Multiple selections identified 
In the case of multiple selections identified, the situation becomes 
more complex to assess. Depending on the type of the selections, 
this generally leads to one the following three scenarios: 
(a) 
The identified selections lie in the selection of individual 
elements or in the selection of subsets of multiple larger sets. 
This amounts to a selection from two or more lists of a certain 
length. A list is a description of equal, i.e. non-convergent, 
alternatives.  
A list is usually considered to have a "certain length" if it has a 
length of at least two or three elements. Whether a list has the 
required length has to be decided on a case-by-case basis. If 
a selection from two or more lists of a certain length has to be 
made to arrive at a specific combination of features, then the 
resulting combination of features, not specifically disclosed in 
the prior art, confers novelty (the "two-list principle"). On the 
other hand, novelty is not conferred if there is a pointer in the 
prior art to the specific combination. Similarly, the mere 
reduction in length of lists does not generally confer novelty 
when the length of the lists is not reduced below the required 
length.  
For example, a claim may define the use of sodium chloride 
(NaCl) as catalyst in a chemical reaction. If D1 describes the 
use of an alkaline metal halide as catalyst, the alkaline metal 
being selected from Li, Na, K and Rb and the halide being 
selected from F, Cl, Br and I, a selection from two lists needs 
to be made to arrive at the specific combination of the claim. In 
the absence of any further information in D1, the claim is new 
over D1.  
The same principle is also applicable to chemical compounds 
described by a Markush formula. This includes individual 
chemical compounds from a known generic formula whereby 
Part G – Chapter VI-14 

 
 
the compound selected results from the selection of specific 
substituents from two or more lists of substituents given in the 
known generic formula. The same applies to specific mixtures 
resulting from the selection of individual components from lists 
of components making up the prior-art mixture. Similar 
considerations also apply to starting materials for the 
manufacture of a final product.  
(b) 
The identified selections lie in the selection of multiple 
sub-ranges from broader numerical ranges. In this context a 
sub-range is a range that either lies completely inside the 
prior-art range or overlaps with an endpoint of the prior-art 
range, thereby creating a range of overlap with the prior-art 
range. These two scenarios are illustrated below, where the 
area of overlap is marked as "xxxx". 
 
claim 
 
prior art 
 
claim 
 
prior art 
The two-list principle mentioned above applies in the same 
way here. In contrast to the situation involving a single 
selection as described in (i)(b), it is not sufficient that, for each 
claimed range taken individually, the prior art discloses a 
specific value or a range endpoint falling within said range to 
anticipate the subject-matter of the claim. That is, the selection 
of multiple sub-ranges will, in the absence of any pointers to 
the combination of the specific sub-ranges, be novel over the 
broader ranges. If a concrete example falls slightly outside the 
claimed ranges, it has to be assessed if the skilled person 
would seriously contemplate working inside all of the claimed 
ranges.  
If the selections of the multiple sub-ranges concern elements 
that interact with each other, which is generally the case for 
the constituents of alloys and compositions, the different 
selections must not be considered in isolation but in 
combination (T 261/15, Reasons 2.3.1). 
For example, claim 1 defines an alloy comprising 5-8 wt% Mg 
and 12-16 wt% Zn and other metals. D1 discloses a similar 
alloy but defines the ranges as 7-20 wt% Mg and 14-22 wt% 
Zn and specifies one concrete example of an alloy having 
16 wt% Mg and 21 wt% Zn. In the absence of any pointers or 
further information in D1 there is no reason why the skilled 
person would seriously contemplate a working example of an 
alloy falling within both claimed ranges.  
(c) 
The identified selections lie in a combination of selections from 
lists and sub-ranges. In this case, both principles described 
 

Part G – Chapter VI-15 
 
above under (ii)(a) and (ii)(b) need to be applied. This situation 
occurs frequently in the field of chemistry when a compound is 
described by a Markush formula. For example, one difference 
over the prior art may be the selection of a specific substituent 
out of a list of substituents and another difference may be in 
the selection of a numerical sub-range out of a broader 
numerical range of repeating units disclosed in the prior art. 
7.1 Error margins in numerical values 
The skilled person knows that numerical values relating to measurements 
are subject to measurement errors which place limits on their accuracy. For 
this reason, the general convention in the scientific and technical literature 
is applied: the last decimal place of a numerical value indicates its degree 
of accuracy. Where no other error margins are given, the maximum margin 
is ascertained by applying the rounding-off convention to the last decimal 
place (see T 175/97), e.g. for a measurement of 3.5 cm, the error margin is 
3.45-3.54. When interpreting ranges of values in patent specifications, the 
skilled person proceeds on the same basis. 
8. Novelty of "reach-through" claims 
"Reach-through" claims are defined as claims attempting to obtain 
protection for a chemical product (and also uses thereof, compositions 
thereof, etc.) by defining that product functionally in terms of its action 
(e.g. agonist, antagonist) on a biological target such as an enzyme or 
receptor (see F-III, 9). In many such cases, the applicant functionally 
defines chemical compounds in this way by reference to a newly identified 
biological target. However, compounds which bind to and exercise this 
action on that biological target are not necessarily novel compounds simply 
because the biological target which they act on is new. Indeed in many 
cases, the applicants themselves provide test results in the applications, 
whereby known compounds are shown to exert this action on the new 
biological target, thus demonstrating that compounds falling within the 
functional definition of the "reach-through" claim are known in the state of 
the art and so establishing that a reach-through claim relating to 
compounds defined in this way lacks novelty. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-1 
 
Chapter VII – Inventive step 
1. General 
An invention is considered as involving an inventive step if, having regard 
to the state of the art, it is not obvious to a person skilled in the Art. Novelty 
(see G-VI) and inventive step are different criteria. The question – "is there 
inventive step?" – only arises if the invention is novel. 
2. State of the art; date of filing 
The "state of the art" for the purposes of considering inventive step is as 
defined in Art. 54(2) (see G-IV, 1). It is to be understood as concerning 
such kind of information as is relevant to some field of technology. It does 
not include later published European applications referred to in Art. 54(3). 
As mentioned in G-IV, 3, the date of priority counts as the date of filing for 
the European application being examined on condition that the priority is 
valid (Art. 89). The state of the art may reside in the relevant common 
general knowledge, which need not necessarily be in writing and needs 
substantiation only if challenged (see T 939/92). 
3. Person skilled in the art 
The "person skilled in the art" is presumed to be a skilled practitioner in the 
relevant field of technology who is possessed of average knowledge and 
ability (average skilled person). The person skilled in the art is aware of 
what was common general knowledge in the art at the relevant date 
(see T 4/98, T 143/94 and T 426/88). The skilled person is also presumed 
to have had access to everything in the "state of the art", in particular the 
documents cited in the search report, and to have been in possession of 
the means and capacity for routine work and experimentation which are 
normal for the field of technology in question. If the problem prompts the 
person skilled in the art to seek its solution in another technical field, the 
specialist in that field is the person qualified to solve the problem. The 
skilled person is involved in constant development in the relevant technical 
field (see T 774/89 and T 817/95). The skilled person may be expected to 
look for suggestions in neighbouring and general technical fields (see 
T 176/84 and T 195/84) or even in remote technical fields, if prompted to do 
so (see T 560/89). Assessment of whether the solution involves an 
inventive step must therefore be based on that specialist's knowledge and 
ability (see T 32/81). There may be instances where it is more appropriate 
to think in terms of a group of persons, e.g. a research or production team, 
rather than a single person (see T 164/92 and T 986/96). It is to be borne in 
mind that the skilled person has the same level of skill for assessing 
inventive step and sufficient disclosure (see T 60/89, T 694/92 and 
T 373/94). 
3.1 Common general knowledge of the skilled person 
Common general knowledge can come from various sources and does not 
necessarily depend on the publication of a specific document on a specific 
date. An assertion that something is common general knowledge need only 
be backed by documentary evidence (for example, a textbook) if this is 
contested (see G-IV, 2). 
Art. 56 
Part G – Chapter VII-2 

 
 
A single publication (e.g. a patent document, but also the content of a 
technical journal) cannot normally be considered as common general 
knowledge (see T 475/88). In special cases, articles in technical journals 
can be representative of common general knowledge (see T 595/90). This 
applies in particular to articles providing a broad review or survey of a topic 
(see T 309/88). For the skilled person addressing the problem of bringing 
together certain starting materials, the conclusions of research on these 
materials carried out by only a very few manufacturers form part of the 
relevant general technical knowledge, even if the studies in question have 
only been published in technical journals (see T 676/94). Another exception 
is that it can also be the information contained in patent specifications or 
scientific publications, if the invention lies in a field of research which is so 
new that the relevant technical knowledge is not yet available from 
textbooks (see T 51/87). 
Basic textbooks and monographs can be considered as representing 
common general knowledge (see T 171/84); if they contain references 
which direct the reader to further articles dealing with specific problems, 
these articles too may be counted as part of such knowledge 
(see T 206/83). Information does not become common general knowledge 
because it has been published in a particular textbook, reference work, etc.; 
on the contrary, it appears in books of this kind because it is already 
common general knowledge (see T 766/91). This means that the 
information in such a publication must have already become part of 
common general knowledge some time before the date of publication. 
4. 
Obviousness 
Thus the question to consider, in relation to any claim defining the 
invention, is whether before the filing or priority date valid for that claim, 
having regard to the art known at the time, it would have been obvious to 
the person skilled in the art to arrive at something falling within the terms of 
the claim. If so, the claim is not allowable for lack of inventive step. The 
term "obvious" means that which does not go beyond the normal progress 
of technology but merely follows plainly or logically from the prior art, 
i.e. something which does not involve the exercise of any skill or ability 
beyond that to be expected of the person skilled in the art. In considering 
inventive step, as distinct from novelty (see G-VI, 3), it is fair to construe 
any published document in the light of knowledge up to and including the 
day before the filing or priority date valid for the claimed invention and to 
have regard to all the knowledge generally available to the person skilled in 
the art up to and including that day. 
5. 
Problem-solution approach 
In order to assess inventive step in an objective and predictable manner, 
the so-called "problem-solution approach" is applied. 
In the problem-solution approach, there are three main stages: 
(i) 
determining the "closest prior art", 
(ii) 
establishing the "objective technical problem" to be solved, and 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-3 
 
(iii) 
considering whether or not the claimed invention, starting from the 
closest prior art and the objective technical problem, would have 
been obvious to the skilled person. 
5.1 Determination of the closest prior art 
The closest prior art is that which in one single reference discloses the 
combination of features which constitutes the most promising starting point 
for a development leading to the invention. In selecting the closest prior art, 
the first consideration is that it must be directed to a similar purpose or 
effect as the invention or at least belong to the same or a closely related 
technical field as the claimed invention. In practice, the closest prior art is 
generally that which corresponds to a similar use and requires the minimum 
of structural and functional modifications to arrive at the claimed invention 
(see T 606/89). 
In some cases there are several equally valid starting points for the 
assessment of inventive step, e.g. if the skilled person has a choice of 
several workable solutions, i.e. solutions starting from different documents, 
which might lead to the invention. If a patent is to be granted, it may be 
necessary to apply the problem-solution approach to each of these starting 
points in turn, i.e. in respect of all these workable solutions. 
However, applying the problem-solution approach from different starting 
points, e.g. from different prior-art documents, is only required if it has been 
convincingly shown that these documents are equally valid springboards. In 
particular in opposition proceedings the structure of the problem-solution 
approach is not that of a forum where the opponent can freely develop as 
many inventive step attacks as desired in the hope that one of said attacks 
has the chance of succeeding (T 320/15, Reasons 1.1.2). 
In the event of refusal or revocation, it is sufficient to show on the basis of 
one relevant piece of prior art that the claimed subject-matter lacks an 
inventive step: there is no need to discuss which document is "closest" to 
the invention; the only relevant question is whether the document used is a 
feasible starting point for assessing inventive step (see T 967/97, T 558/00, 
T 21/08, T 308/09 and T 1289/09). This is valid even if the problem 
identified in a problem-solution reasoning may be different from the one 
identified by the applicant/patentee. 
As a consequence the applicant or proprietor cannot refute the argument 
that the claimed subject-matter lacks inventive step by submitting that a 
more promising springboard is available: a piece of prior art on the basis of 
which the claimed invention is considered non-obvious cannot be "closer" 
than a document on the basis of which the claimed invention appears 
obvious, because it is evident in this situation that the former does not 
represent the most promising springboard from which to arrive at the 
invention (T 1742/12, Reasons 6.5; T 824/05, Reasons 6.2). 
The closest prior art must be assessed from the skilled person's point of 
view on the day before the filing or priority date valid for the claimed 
invention. The examiner must not make an artificial interpretation of the 
Part G – Chapter VII-4 

 
 
closest prior art based on prior knowledge of the application (see also 
G-VII, 8). 
In identifying the closest prior art, account is taken of what the applicant 
acknowledges in the description and claims to be known. Any such 
acknowledgement of known art is regarded by the examiner as being 
correct unless the applicant states that a mistake was made 
(see C-IV, 7.3(vii)). 
5.2 Formulation of the objective technical problem 
In the second stage, one establishes in an objective way the technical 
problem to be solved. To do this one studies the application (or the 
patent), the closest prior art and the difference (also called "the 
distinguishing feature(s)" of the claimed invention) in terms of features 
(either structural or functional) between the claimed invention and the 
closest prior art, identifies the technical effect resulting from the 
distinguishing features, and then formulates the technical problem. 
Features which cannot be seen to make any contribution, either 
independently or in combination with other features, to the technical 
character of an invention cannot support the presence of an inventive step 
(see T 641/00). Such a situation can occur for instance if a feature only 
contributes to the solution of a non-technical problem, for instance a 
problem in a field excluded from patentability. For the treatment of claims 
comprising technical and non-technical features, see G-VII, 5.4. The criteria 
for determining whether a feature, even if non-technical in isolation, 
contributes to producing a technical effect in the context of the invention are 
explained in G-II, 3 and subsections, for different types of subject-matter 
listed under Art. 52(2). 
In the context of the problem-solution approach, the technical problem 
means the aim and task of modifying or adapting the closest prior art to 
provide the technical effects that the invention provides over the closest 
prior art. The technical problem thus defined is often referred to as the 
"objective technical problem". 
The objective technical problem derived in this way may not be what the 
applicant presented as "the problem" in the application. The latter may 
require reformulation, since the objective technical problem is based on 
objectively established facts, in particular appearing in the prior art revealed 
in the course of the proceedings, which may be different from the prior art 
of which the applicant was actually aware at the time the application was 
filed. In particular, the prior art cited in the search report may put the 
invention in an entirely different perspective from that apparent from 
reading the application only. Reformulation might lead to the objective 
technical problem being less ambitious than originally envisaged by the 
application. An example of such a case would be where the originally 
stated problem is the provision of a product, process or method 
demonstrating some improvement, but where there is no evidence that the 
claimed subject-matter is thereby improved over the closest prior art 
uncovered in the search; rather, there is only evidence with respect to more 
distantly related prior art (or possibly none at all). In this case, the problem 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-5 
 
has to be reformulated as the provision of an alternative product, process 
or method. The obviousness of the claimed solution to that reformulated 
problem must then be assessed in the light of the cited prior art 
(see T 87/08). 
The extent to which such reformulation of the technical problem is possible 
has to be assessed on the merits of each particular case. As a matter of 
principle any effect provided by the invention may be used as a basis for 
the reformulation of the technical problem, as long as said effect is 
derivable from the application as filed (see T 386/89). It is also possible to 
rely on new effects submitted subsequently during the proceedings by the 
applicant, provided the skilled person, having the common general 
knowledge at the effective filing date in mind, and based on the application 
as originally filed, would derive said effect as being encompassed by the 
technical teaching and embodied by the same originally disclosed invention 
(see G-VII, 11 and G 2/21). 
It is noted that the objective technical problem must be so formulated as not 
to contain pointers to the technical solution, since including part of a 
technical solution offered by an invention in the statement of the problem 
must, when the state of the art is assessed in terms of that problem, 
necessarily result in an ex post facto view being taken of inventive activity 
(see T 229/85). Where the claim refers to an aim to be achieved in a 
non-technical field, however, this aim may legitimately appear in the 
formulation of the problem as part of the framework of the technical 
problem to be solved, in particular as a constraint that has to be met 
(see G-VII, 5.4 and G-VII, 5.4.1). 
The expression "technical problem" is interpreted broadly; it does not 
necessarily imply that the technical solution is an improvement to the prior 
art. Thus the problem could be simply to seek an alternative to a known 
device or process which provides the same or similar effects or is more 
cost-effective. A technical problem may be regarded as being solved only if 
it is credible that substantially all claimed embodiments exhibit the technical 
effects upon which the invention is based. Criteria for deciding whether lack 
of reproducibility of the claimed invention is to be treated under Art. 56 or 
83 are explained in F-III, 12. 
Sometimes, the objective technical problem must be regarded as an 
aggregation of a plurality of "partial problems". This is the case where 
there is no technical effect achieved by all the distinguishing features taken 
in combination, but rather a plurality of partial problems is independently 
solved by different sets of distinguishing features (see G-VII, 6 and 
T 389/86). 
5.3 Could-would approach 
In the third stage the question to be answered is whether there is any 
teaching in the prior art as a whole that would (not simply could, but would) 
have prompted the skilled person, faced with the objective technical 
problem, to modify or adapt the closest prior art while taking account of that 
teaching, thereby arriving at something falling within the terms of the 
claims, and thus achieving what the invention achieves (see G-VII, 4). 
Part G – Chapter VII-6 

 
 
In other words, the point is not whether the skilled person could have 
arrived at the invention by adapting or modifying the closest prior art but 
whether the skilled person would have done so because the prior art 
provided motivation to do so in the expectation of some improvement or 
advantage (see T 2/83). 
Even 
an 
implicit prompting 
or 
implicitly 
recognisable incentive is sufficient to show that the skilled person would 
have combined the elements from the prior art (see T 257/98 and T 35/04). 
This must have been the case for the skilled person before the filing or 
priority date valid for the claim under examination. 
When an invention requires various steps to arrive at the complete solution 
of the technical problem, it is nevertheless regarded as obvious if the 
technical problem to be solved leads the skilled person to the solution in a 
step-by-step manner and each individual step is obvious in the light of what 
has already been accomplished and of the residual task still to be solved 
(see T 623/97 and T 558/00). 
5.4 Claims comprising technical and non-technical features 
It is legitimate to have a mix of technical and non-technical features 
appearing in a claim, as is often the case with computer-implemented 
inventions. The non-technical features may even form a major part of the 
claimed subject-matter. However, in the light of Art. 52(1), (2) and (3), the 
presence of an inventive step under Art. 56 requires a non-obvious 
technical solution to a technical problem (T 641/00, T 1784/06). 
When assessing the inventive step of such a mixed-type invention, all those 
features which contribute to the technical character of the invention are 
taken into account. These also include the features which, when taken in 
isolation, are non-technical, but do, in the context of the invention, 
contribute to producing a technical effect serving a technical purpose, 
thereby contributing to the technical character of the invention. However, 
features which do not contribute to the technical character of the invention 
cannot support the presence of an inventive step ("COMVIK approach", 
T 641/00, G 1/19). Such a situation may arise, for instance, if a feature 
contributes only to the solution of a non-technical problem, e.g. a problem 
in a field excluded from patentability (see G-II, 3 and subsections). 
The problem-solution approach is applied to mixed-type inventions in such 
a way as to ensure that inventive step is not acknowledged on the basis of 
features not contributing to the technical character of the invention, while all 
those features which do contribute are properly identified and taken into 
account in the assessment. To this end, where the claim refers to an aim to 
be achieved in a non-technical field, this aim may legitimately appear in the 
formulation of the objective technical problem as part of the framework of 
the technical problem that is to be solved, in particular as a constraint that 
has to be met (T 641/00; see step (iii)(c) below and G-VII, 5.4.1). 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-7 
 
The steps below outline the application of the problem-solution approach to 
mixed-type inventions following the COMVIK approach: 
(i) 
The features which contribute to the technical character of the 
invention are determined on the basis of the technical effects 
achieved in the context of the invention (see G-II, 3.1 to 3.7). 
(ii) 
A suitable starting point in the prior art is selected as the closest prior 
art with a focus on the features contributing to the technical character 
of the invention identified in step (i) (see G-VII, 5.1). 
(iii) 
The differences from the closest prior art are identified. The technical 
effect(s) of these differences, in the context of the claim as a whole, 
is(are) determined in order to identify from these differences the 
features which make a technical contribution and those which do not. 
(a) 
If there are no differences (not even a non-technical 
difference), an objection under Art. 54 is raised. 
(b) 
If the differences do not make any technical contribution, an 
objection under Art. 56 is raised. The reasoning for the 
objection is that the subject-matter of a claim cannot be 
inventive if there is no technical contribution to the prior art. 
(c) 
If the differences include features making a technical 
contribution, the following applies: 
– 
The objective technical problem is formulated on the 
basis of the technical effect(s) achieved by these 
features. In addition, if the differences include features 
making no technical contribution, these features, or any 
non-technical effect achieved by the invention, may be 
used in the formulation of the objective technical 
problem as part of what is "given" to the skilled person, 
in particular as a constraint that has to be met 
(see G-VII, 5.4.1). 
– 
If the claimed technical solution to the objective 
technical problem is obvious to the person skilled in the 
art, an objection under Art. 56 is raised. 
Determination of the features contributing to the technical character of the 
invention should be performed for all claim features in step (i) (T 172/03, 
T 154/04). However, in practice, due to the complexity of this task, the 
examiner can normally perform the determination in step (i) on a 
first-glance basis only and perform the analysis at the beginning of step (iii) 
in a more detailed manner. In step (iii), the technical effects achieved by the 
differences over the selected closest prior art are determined. The extent to 
which the differences contribute to the technical character of the invention 
is analysed in relation to these technical effects. This analysis, limited to the 
differences, can be performed in a more detailed manner and on a more 
concrete basis than the one performed at step (i). It may therefore reveal 
Part G – Chapter VII-8 

 
 
that some features considered in step (i) at first glance as not contributing 
to the technical character of the invention do, on closer inspection, make 
such a contribution. The reverse situation is also possible. In such cases, 
the selection of the closest prior art in step (ii) might need to be revised. 
When performing the analysis in steps (i) and (iii) above, care must be 
taken to avoid missing any features that might contribute to the technical 
character of the claimed subject-matter, in particular if the examiners 
reproduce their understanding of the subject-matter of the claim in their 
own words during the analysis (T 756/06). 
The examples in G-VII, 5.4.2.1 to 5.4.2.4 illustrate the application of the 
COMVIK approach. 
5.4.1 Formulation of the objective technical problem for claims 
comprising technical and non-technical features 
The objective technical problem must be a technical problem which the 
skilled person in the particular technical field might have been asked to 
solve at the relevant date. It must not be formulated in such a way as to 
refer to matters of which the skilled person would only have become aware 
by knowledge of the solution claimed (G-VII, 5.2). In other words, the 
objective technical problem must be so formulated as not to contain 
pointers to the technical solution. However, this principle only applies to 
those features of the subject-matter claimed which contribute to the 
technical character of the invention and hence are part of the technical 
solution. Merely because some feature appears in the claim does not 
automatically exclude it from appearing in the formulation of the problem. In 
particular, where the claim refers to an aim to be achieved in a 
non-technical field, this aim may legitimately appear in the formulation of 
the problem as part of the framework of the technical problem that is to be 
solved, in particular as a constraint that has to be met (T 641/00). 
In other words, the formulation of the objective technical problem may refer 
to features which do not make a technical contribution, or to any 
non-technical effect achieved by the invention, as a given framework within 
which the technical problem is posed, for example in the form of a 
requirements specification provided to the person skilled in a technical field. 
The aim of formulating the technical problem according to these principles 
is to ensure that inventive step is acknowledged only on the basis of 
features which contribute to the technical character of the invention. The 
technical effects used for formulating the objective technical problem have 
to be derivable from the application as filed when considered in the light of 
the closest prior art. They must be achieved over the whole scope of the 
claim. A claim must therefore be limited in such a way that substantially all 
embodiments encompassed by the claim show these effects (G 1/19, 
G-VII, 5.2). 
For technical effects which are not directly achieved by the claimed 
invention but are only "potential technical effects", see G-II, 3.3.2. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-9 
 
Regarding technical effects arising from specific technical implementations 
where the design of algorithms is motivated by technical considerations of 
the internal functioning of the computer, see G-II, 3.3. 
In the case of claims directed to a technical implementation of a 
non-technical method or scheme, in particular of a business method or 
game rules, a modification to the underlying non-technical method or 
scheme aimed at circumventing a technical problem, rather than 
addressing this problem in an inherently technical way, is not considered to 
make a technical contribution over the prior art (T 258/03, T 414/12). 
Rather, such a solution constitutes a modification to the constraints given to 
the technically skilled person tasked with the implementation of the given 
non-technical method or scheme. 
In such cases, consideration must be given to any further technical 
advantages or effects associated with the specific features of the technical 
implementation over and above the effects and advantages inherent in the 
underlying non-technical method or scheme. The latter are at best to be 
regarded as incidental to that implementation (T 1543/06). They do not 
qualify as technical effects for the purpose of defining the objective 
technical problem. 
Example 
In a game played online over a distributed computer system, the effect of 
reduction in network traffic obtained by reducing the maximum number of 
players cannot form the basis for formulating the objective technical 
problem. It is rather a direct consequence of changing the rules of the 
game, which is inherent in the non-technical scheme. The problem of 
network traffic reduction is not addressed by a technical solution but 
circumvented by the non-technical gaming solution offered. The feature 
defining the maximum number of players thus constitutes a given constraint 
which forms part of the non-technical scheme that the skilled person, e.g. a 
software engineer, would be tasked to implement. Whether the claimed 
specific technical implementation would have been obvious to the skilled 
person would still have to be assessed. 
5.4.2 Examples of applying the COMVIK approach 
The following examples aim at illustrating the application of the COMVIK 
approach using the steps listed in G-VII, 5.4 in various scenarios. The 
scenarios are adapted from case law. The claims are greatly simplified for 
illustrative purposes. 
5.4.2.1 Example 1 
Claim 1: 
Method of facilitating shopping on a mobile device wherein: 
(a) 
the user selects two or more products to be purchased; 
Part G – Chapter VII-10 

 
 
(b) 
the mobile device transmits the selected products data and the 
device location to a server; 
(c) 
the server accesses a database of vendors to identify vendors 
offering at least one of the selected products; 
(d) 
the server determines, on the basis of the device location and the 
identified vendors, an optimal shopping tour for purchasing the 
selected products by accessing a cache memory in which optimal 
shopping tours determined for previous requests are stored; and 
(e) 
the server transmits the optimal shopping tour to the mobile device 
for displaying. 
Application of the steps of the problem-solution approach according to 
G-VII, 5.4: 
Step (i): The features contributing to the technical character are at first 
glance identified as a distributed system comprising a mobile device 
connected to a server computer which has a cache memory and is 
connected to a database. 
Step (ii): Document D1, which discloses a method for facilitating shopping 
on a mobile device wherein the user selects a single product and the server 
determines from a database the vendor selling the selected product nearest 
to the user and transmits this information to the mobile device, is selected 
as the closest prior art. 
Step (iii): The differences between the subject-matter of claim 1 and D1 
are: 
(1) 
The user can select two or more products to purchase (instead of a 
single product only). 
(2) 
An "optimal shopping tour" for purchasing the two or more products 
is provided to the user. 
(3) 
The optimal shopping tour is determined by the server by accessing 
a cache memory in which optimal shopping tours determined for 
previous requests are stored. 
Differences (1) and (2) represent modifications of the underlying business 
concept, since they define producing an ordered list of shops to visit which 
sell these products. No technical purpose is served, and no technical 
effects can be identified from these differences. Hence, these features 
make no technical contribution over D1. On the other hand, difference (3) 
makes a technical contribution as it relates to the technical implementation 
of differences (1) and (2) and has the technical effect of enabling rapid 
determination of the optimal shopping tour by accessing previous requests 
which are stored in a cache memory. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-11 
 
Step (iii)(c): The objective technical problem is to be formulated from the 
perspective of the person skilled in the art as an expert in a technical field 
(G-VII, 3). Such a person is not deemed to have any expertise in 
business-related matters. In the present case, the skilled person can be 
defined as an expert in information technology who gains knowledge of the 
business-related features (1) and (2) as part of the formulation of the 
technical problem to be solved, as would be the case in a realistic situation 
in the form of a requirement specification. The objective technical problem 
is thus formulated as how to modify the method of D1 to implement in a 
technically efficient manner the non-technical business concept defined by 
the differences (1) and (2), which is given as a constraint to be met. 
Obviousness: Following requirement (1), it would have been a matter of 
routine for the skilled person to adapt the mobile device used in D1 so as to 
enable the user to select two or more products instead of a single one. It 
would also have been obvious to assign the task of determining the optimal 
shopping tour (arising from requirement (2)) to the server, by analogy with 
the server likewise determining the nearest vendor in D1. Since the 
objective technical problem further requires a technically efficient 
implementation, the skilled person would have looked for efficient technical 
implementations of the determination of a tour. A second document D2 
discloses a travel planning system for determining travel trips, listing a set 
of places to visit, and addresses this technical problem: the system of D2 
accesses for this purpose a cache memory storing results of previous 
queries. The skilled person would thus have considered the teaching of D2 
and adapted the server in D1 to access and use a cache memory as 
suggested in D2 so as to provide a technically efficient implementation of 
the determination of the optimal shopping tour, i.e. difference (3). Hence, 
no inventive step is involved within the meaning of Art. 52(1) and 56. 
Remarks: The example shows a typical application of the approach 
developed in T 641/00 (COMVIK). The analysis of technical effects is 
performed in detail at step (iii) to see if the differences from the closest prior 
art comprise features making a technical contribution. This analysis refines 
the initial finding of step (i) by identifying the feature of accessing the cache 
memory for results of previous requests in the step of determining the tour 
as a technical feature. Note that in this case step (i) would not need to be 
indicated explicitly in the reasoning. In step (iii)(c), the non-technical 
modifications to the business concept are given to the skilled person as a 
constraint to be met. Whether or not the new business concept is 
innovative is here irrelevant for the assessment of inventive step, which has 
to be based on the features of its technical implementation. 
5.4.2.2 Example 2 
Claim 1: 
A computer-implemented method for brokering offers and demands in the 
field of transporting freight, comprising the following steps: 
(a) 
receiving transportation offers/demands from users, including 
location and time data; 
Part G – Chapter VII-12 

 
 
(b) 
receiving current location information of the users from GPS 
terminals with which the users are equipped; 
(c) 
after receiving a new offer/demand request, verifying if there are 
previous offers/demands not yet satisfied that can respond to the 
new request; 
(d) 
if so, selecting the one for which the current locations of both users 
are closest; and 
(e) 
otherwise storing the new request. 
Application of the steps of the problem-solution approach according to 
G-VII, 5.4: 
Step (i): Underlying the claimed method is the following business method: 
A method for brokering offers and demands in the field of freight 
transportation, comprising: 
– 
receiving transportation offers/demands from users, including 
location and time data; 
– 
receiving information regarding the current location of the users; 
– 
after receiving a new offer/demand request, verifying if there are 
previous offers/demands not yet satisfied that can respond to the 
new request; 
– 
if so, selecting the one for which the current locations of both users 
are closest; and 
– 
otherwise storing the new request. 
Such a business method is per se non-technical and excluded under 
Art. 52(2)(c) and (3). Brokering offers and demands is a typical business 
activity. Using the geographical location of users is the kind of criterion 
which a transportation broker could specify as part of a business method 
based on non-technical, business considerations only. This business 
method does not serve any technical purpose in the context of the invention 
and thus does not contribute to its technical character. 
Therefore, only the features related to the technical implementation of this 
business method can be identified as the features contributing to the 
technical character of the invention: 
– 
The business method steps are carried out by a computer. 
– 
The current location information is received from GPS terminals. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-13 
 
Step (ii): As a suitable starting point, document D1, which discloses a 
method of order management in which a server computer receives location 
information from GPS terminals, is selected as the closest prior art. 
Step (iii): The difference between the subject-matter of claim 1 and D1 is 
thus the computer implementation of the steps of the business method 
defined above. 
The technical effect of this difference is merely the automation of the 
business method underlying claim 1. The conclusion reached in step (i) 
holds, since the only distinguishing feature making a technical contribution 
is the technical implementation of this business method. 
Step (iii)(c): The objective technical problem is formulated as how to adapt 
the method of D1 so as to implement the business method of brokering 
offers and demands according to the user's current location. The person 
skilled in the art is considered to be a software project team and is given 
the knowledge of the business method in the form of a requirement 
specification. 
Obviousness: Adapting the method of D1 to execute the business method 
steps is straightforward and requires routine programming only. Therefore, 
no inventive step is involved within the meaning of Art. 52(1) and Art. 56. 
Remarks: In this example, it was clear from the initial analysis at step (i) 
that underlying the claimed method was a method for brokering offers and 
demands, which as such is a business method. The features defining the 
business method were easily separable from the technical features of its 
computer implementation. Therefore, this example illustrates a line of 
argument in which it was possible in step (i) to determine all the features 
which contribute to the technical character of the invention and all those 
which do not. This line of argument pertains more to the field of 
computer-implemented business methods and might be less suitable in 
other fields. 
5.4.2.3 Example 3 
This example illustrates the two-level technicality analysis set forth in 
section G-VII, 5.4. 
Claim 1: 
A system for the transmission of a broadcast media channel to a remote 
client over a data connection, said system including: 
(a) 
means for storing an identifier of the remote client and an indication 
of an available data rate of the data connection to the remote client, 
said available data rate being lower than the maximum data rate for 
the data connection to the remote client; 
(b) 
means for determining a rate at which data is to be transmitted based 
on the indication of the available data rate of the data connection; 
and 
Part G – Chapter VII-14 

 
 
(c) 
means for transmitting data at the determined rate to said remote 
client. 
Application of the steps of the problem-solution approach according to 
G-VII, 5.4: 
Step (i): At first glance, all features appear to contribute to the technical 
character of the invention. 
Step (ii): Document D1, which discloses a system for broadcasting video 
over an xDSL connection to the set-top boxes of subscribers, is selected as 
the closest prior art. The system comprises a database storing identifiers of 
subscribers' computers and, in association with them, an indication of the 
maximum data rate for the data connection to each subscriber's computer. 
The system further comprises means for transmitting the video to a 
subscriber's computer at the maximum data rate stored for said computer. 
Step (iii): The differences between the subject-matter of claim 1 and D1 
are: 
(1) 
Storing an indication of an available data rate of the data connection 
to the remote client, said available data rate being lower than the 
maximum data rate for the data connection to the remote client. 
(2) 
Using said available data rate to determine the rate at which the data 
is transmitted to the remote client (instead of transmitting the data at 
the maximum data rate stored for said remote client as in D1). 
The purpose served by using an "available data rate" which is lower than a 
maximum data rate for the data connection to the remote client is not 
apparent from the claim. Therefore, the relevant disclosure in the 
description is taken into account. In the description, it is explained that a 
pricing model is provided which allows a customer to choose from several 
service levels, each service level corresponding to an available data-rate 
option having a different price. A user may select an available data rate 
lower than the maximum data rate possible with the connection in order to 
pay less. Hence, using an available data rate which is lower than the 
maximum data rate for the connection to the remote client addresses the 
aim of allowing a customer to choose a data-rate service level according to 
that pricing model. This is not a technical aim, but an aim of a financial, 
administrative or commercial nature and thus falls under the exclusion of 
schemes, rules and methods for doing business in Art. 52(2)(c). It may thus 
be included in the formulation of the objective technical problem as a 
constraint to be met. 
The features of storing the available data rate and of using it to determine 
the rate at which the data is transmitted have the technical effect of 
implementing this non-technical aim. 
Step (iii)(c): The objective technical problem is therefore formulated as how 
to implement in the system of D1 a pricing model which allows the 
customer to choose a data-rate service level. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-15 
 
Obviousness: Given the task of implementing this choice of data-rate 
service level in accordance with the pricing model, it would be obvious to 
the skilled person that the data rate purchased by a subscriber (i.e. the 
"available data rate" of claim 1), which can only be lower or equal to the 
maximum data rate of the data connection to the subscriber's computer 
(i.e. the "remote client" of claim 1), would have to be stored for each 
subscriber and used by the system to determine the rate at which data is to 
be transmitted to a subscriber. Therefore, no inventive step is involved 
within the meaning of Art. 52(1) and Art. 56. 
Remarks: This example illustrates a claim which involves a complex mix of 
technical and non-technical features. On a first-glance basis in step (i), all 
features appeared to contribute to the technical character of the invention. 
After comparison with D1, a detailed analysis of the technical character of 
the contribution made by the invention over D1 was possible at step (iii). 
This detailed analysis revealed that the differentiating features addressed a 
non-technical aim. This non-technical aim could thus be incorporated into 
the formulation of the objective technical problem (T 641/00). 
5.4.2.4 Example 4 
Claim 1: 
A computer-implemented method of determining areas in which there is an 
increased risk of condensation for a surface in a building comprising the 
steps of: 
(a) 
controlling an infrared (IR) camera to capture an image of the 
temperature distribution of the surface; 
(b) 
receiving mean values for the air temperature and the relative air 
humidity measured inside the building over the last 24 hours; 
(c) 
calculating, based on said mean air temperature and mean relative 
air humidity, a condensation temperature at which there is a risk of 
condensation on the surface; 
(d) 
comparing the temperature at each point on the image to said 
calculated condensation temperature; 
(e) 
identifying the image points having a temperature lower than the 
calculated condensation temperature as areas at increased risk of 
condensation on the surface; and 
(f) 
modifying the image by colouring the image points identified in step 
(e) in a particular colour to indicate the areas at increased risk of 
condensation to a user. 
Part G – Chapter VII-16 

 
 
Application of the steps of the problem-solution approach according to 
G-VII, 5.4: 
Step (i): The control of an IR camera in step (a) clearly makes a technical 
contribution. The question is whether steps (b) to (f) also contribute to the 
technical character of the claimed subject-matter.  
Considered in isolation, steps (b) to (e) relate to algorithmic/mathematical 
steps and step (f) defines a presentation of information. However, the claim 
is not directed to a mental act, a mathematical method or presentation of 
information as such (which would be excluded from patentability under 
Art. 52(2)(a), (c), (d) and (3)) because the claimed subject-matter involves 
technical means such as a computer. 
Therefore, it has to be assessed whether the algorithmic and mathematical 
steps as well as the step related to presentation of information do, in the 
context of the invention, contribute to producing a technical effect, thereby 
contributing to the technical character of the invention.  
Since the above-mentioned algorithmic and mathematical steps (b) to (e) 
are used to predict the physical state (condensation) of an existing real 
object (surface) from measurements of physical properties (IR image, 
measured air temperature and relative air humidity over time), they 
contribute to a technical effect serving a technical purpose. This applies 
regardless of what use is made of the output information about the risk of 
condensation on the surface (see G-II, 3.3, in particular subsection 
"Technical applications"). Thus, steps (b) to (e) contribute also to the 
technical character of the invention.  
A decision on whether step (f) makes a technical contribution is deferred to 
step (iii) below. 
Step (ii): Document D1 discloses a method for monitoring a surface to 
determine the risk of condensation forming on it. The risk of condensation 
is determined based on the difference of the temperature reading obtained 
via an IR pyrometer for a single point on the surface and the condensation 
temperature calculated based on the actual ambient air temperature and 
the relative air humidity. The numerical value of the difference is then 
shown to a user as an indication of the likelihood of condensation at said 
point. This document is taken as the closest prior art. 
Step (iii): The differences between the subject-matter of claim 1 and D1 
are: 
(1) 
an IR camera is used (instead of the IR pyrometer of D1, which only 
captures the temperature at a single point of the surface); 
(2) 
mean values for air temperature and relative air humidity measured 
inside the building over the last 24 hours are received;  
 

Part G – Chapter VII-17 
 
(3) 
the condensation temperature is calculated on the basis of the mean 
air temperature and mean relative air humidity and compared to the 
temperature at each point on the IR image of the surface; 
(4) 
image points having a temperature lower than the calculated 
condensation temperature are identified as areas at increased risk of 
condensation on the surface; 
(5) 
colours are used to indicate areas at increased risk of condensation. 
As mentioned above, distinguishing features (1)-(4) contribute to the 
technical character of the claimed subject-matter and must be taken into 
consideration for the formulation of the technical problem. These features 
produce the technical effect of a more precise and reliable prediction of the 
risk of condensation as a result of considering all surface areas (as 
opposed to a single point) and accounting for temperature variations during 
a day. 
Distinguishing feature (5) defines a particular manner of presenting 
information to a user (Art. 52(2)(d)) which does not produce a technical 
effect since any effect of the choice of displaying data using colours rather 
than numerical values depends on subjective preferences of the user: 
some users may prefer the former and other the latter (see G-II, 3.7). This 
feature thus does not make a technical contribution. It cannot support the 
presence of an inventive step and is not discussed further in the analysis 
since it has no bearing on the other distinguishing features.  
Step (iii)(c): The objective technical problem is therefore formulated as how 
to determine the risk of condensation on a surface in a more precise and 
reliable manner. 
Obviousness: The use of an IR camera for obtaining temperature readings 
on a surface can be considered a normal technical development in the field 
of thermography without exercising any inventive activity: IR cameras were 
well known at the effective date of the application. Using an IR camera is a 
straightforward alternative to measuring the temperature at several points 
on the monitored surface using an IR pyrometer for the skilled person to 
arrive at a temperature distribution of the surface.  
However, D1 does not suggest considering a temperature distribution on a 
surface (as opposed to at a single point) and calculating mean values for 
air temperature and taking relative air humidity measured inside the 
building over the last 24 hours into consideration. Neither does it suggest 
taking into account different conditions which may realistically occur inside 
the building over time for predicting the risk of condensation. 
Assuming that no other prior art suggests the technical solution of the 
objective technical problem defined by distinguishing features (1)-(4), the 
subject-matter of claim 1 involves an inventive step. 
Remarks: This example illustrates the situation addressed in G-VII, 5.4, 
second paragraph: features which, when taken in isolation, are 
Part G – Chapter VII-18 

 
 
non-technical but do, in the context of the claimed invention, contribute to 
producing a technical effect serving a technical purpose (features (b) to (e), 
which are algorithmic/mathematical steps). Since said features contribute to 
the technical character of the invention, they may support the presence of 
an inventive step. 
5.4.2.5 Example 5 
Claim 1: 
A method for coating a workpiece using a thermal spray coating process, 
the method comprising: 
(a) 
applying, using a spray jet, a material to the workpiece by thermal 
spray coating; 
(b) 
monitoring the thermal spray coating process in real time by 
detecting properties of particles in the spray jet and supplying the 
properties as actual values; 
(c) 
comparing the actual values with target values; 
and, in the event that the actual values deviate from the target values, 
(d) 
adjusting process parameters for the thermal spray coating process 
automatically by a controller on the basis of a neural network, said 
controller being a neuro-fuzzy controller which combines a neural-
network and fuzzy logic rules and thereby maps statistical 
relationships between input variables and output variables of the 
neuro-fuzzy controller. 
Background: The invention relates to the control of an industrial process, 
i.e. thermal spray coating of a workpiece. The material used for the coating 
is injected with the help of a carrier gas into the high-temperature jet, where 
it is accelerated and/or molten. The properties of the resulting coatings are 
subject to great fluctuations, even with seemingly constant parameters of 
the coating operation. The spray jet is monitored visually with a CCD 
camera. The image picked up by the camera is sent to an image 
processing system, from which the properties of particles in the spray jet 
(e.g. velocity, temperature, size, etc) can be derived. A neuro-fuzzy 
controller is a mathematical algorithm which combines a neural network 
with fuzzy-logic rules. 
Application of the steps of the problem-solution approach according to 
COMVIK:  
Step (i): The method is directed at thermal spray coating, i.e. a specific 
technical process, comprising various concrete technical features, e.g. 
particles, workpiece, a spray coating device (implicit).  
Step (ii): Document D1 discloses a method for the control of a thermal 
spray coating process by applying material to a workpiece using a spray jet, 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-19 
 
detecting deviations in the properties of the particles in said spray jet and 
adjusting process parameters automatically on the basis of the outcome of 
a neural network analysis. This document represents the closest prior art. 
Step (iii): The difference between the method of claim 1 and D1 concerns 
the use of a neuro-fuzzy controller combining a neural network and fuzzy 
logic rules as specified in the second part of step (d). 
Computational models and algorithms related to artificial intelligence are, 
on their own, of an abstract mathematical nature (G-II, 3.3.1). The feature 
of combining results of a neural network analysis and fuzzy logic defines a 
mathematical method when taken on its own. However, together with the 
feature of adjusting the process parameters, it contributes to the control of 
the coating process. Hence, the output of the mathematical method is 
directly used in the control of a specific technical process. 
Control of a specific technical process is a technical application, see 
G-II, 3.3 
(subsection 
"Technical 
applications"). 
In 
conclusion, 
the 
differentiating feature contributes to producing a technical effect serving a 
technical purpose and thereby contributes to the technical character of the 
invention. Therefore, it is taken into account in the assessment of inventive 
step. 
Step (iii)(c): The objective technical problem must be derived from technical 
effects that are based on objectively established facts and that are directly 
and causally related to the technical features of the claim. 
In the present case, the mere fact that the parameters are calculated using 
a combination of results of a neural network analysis and fuzzy logic – 
without any details on specific adaptation to the thermal spray coating 
process – cannot credibly ensure any technical effect beyond a different 
adjustment of the process parameters. In particular, no evidence can be 
found to acknowledge any increase in the quality of coating properties or of 
the thermal spraying method that would result from the combination of 
features of claim 1. In the absence of such evidence, the objective technical 
problem is to provide an alternative solution to the problem of adjusting the 
process parameters which control the thermal spray coating process which 
is already solved in D1. 
Obviousness: Starting from the teaching of D1 and tasked with the above 
objective technical problem, the person skilled in the field of control 
engineering (G-VII, 3) would look for an alternative solution to determine 
the control parameters of the process. 
A second prior-art document D2 discloses a combination of a neural 
network and fuzzy logic rules providing a neuro-fuzzy controller in the 
technical field of control engineering. From this prior art, it has become 
apparent that at the date of filing of the application, neuro-fuzzy controllers 
were well known and applied in the field of control engineering. The present 
solution is therefore considered to be an obvious alternative, rendering the 
subject-matter of claim 1 not inventive. 
Part G – Chapter VII-20 

 
 
Remarks: This example illustrates the case where a mathematical feature 
which, when taken in isolation, is non-technical but contributes to producing 
a technical effect serving a technical purpose in the context of the claim. 
The feature of using a combination of neural network results and fuzzy logic 
for adjusting process parameters for controlling thermal spraying 
contributes to the technical character of the invention and may therefore 
support the presence of an inventive step. 
The availability of the general teaching of using neuro-fuzzy controllers in 
the field of control engineering resulted in the objection that the controller of 
claim 1 was an obvious alternative. This particular objection could have 
been avoided if the claim had recited further features of the fuzzy control 
method linked to some technical properties of the spray coating process. 
For example, if the desirable coating properties resulted from specific input 
and output variables of the neuro-fuzzy controller, how the controller is 
trained or how the output is used in the regulation of the process 
parameters, these features would have had to be recited in the claim. The 
description and figures as filed could have provided evidence that the 
desirable coating properties are indeed achieved. As currently claimed, the 
neuro-fuzzy controller is not adapted for the specific application of thermal 
spray coating. There is no evidence of any particular technical effect which 
is credibly achieved over the whole claimed scope other than that of 
providing different process parameters as input to the controller. 
6. 
Combining pieces of prior art 
In the context of the problem-solution approach, it is permissible to combine 
the disclosure of one or more documents, parts of documents or other 
pieces of prior art (e.g. a public prior use or unwritten general technical 
knowledge) with the closest prior art. However, the fact that more than one 
disclosure must be combined with the closest prior art in order to arrive at a 
combination of features may be an indication of the presence of an 
inventive step, e.g. if the claimed invention is not a mere aggregation of 
features (see G-VII, 7). 
A different situation occurs where the invention is a solution to a plurality of 
independent "partial problems" (see G-VII, 7 and 5.2). Indeed, in such a 
case it is necessary to separately assess, for each partial problem, whether 
the combination of features solving the partial problem is obviously 
derivable from the prior art. Hence, a different document can be combined 
with the closest prior art for each partial problem (see T 389/86). For the 
subject-matter of the claim to be inventive, it suffices however that one of 
these combinations of features involves an inventive step. 
In determining whether it would be obvious to combine two or more distinct 
disclosures, the examiner also has regard in particular to the following: 
(i) 
whether the content of the disclosures (e.g. documents) is such as to 
make it likely or unlikely that the person skilled in the art, when faced 
with the problem solved by the invention, would combine them – for 
example, if two disclosures considered as a whole could not in 
practice be readily combined because of inherent incompatibility in 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-21 
 
disclosed features essential to the invention, the combining of these 
disclosures is not normally regarded as obvious; 
(ii) 
whether the disclosures, e.g. documents, come from similar, 
neighbouring or remote technical fields (see G-VII, 3); 
(iii) 
the combining of two or more parts of the same disclosure would be 
obvious if there is a reasonable basis for the skilled person to 
associate these parts with one another. It would normally be obvious 
to combine with a prior-art document a well-known textbook or 
standard dictionary; this is only a special case of the general 
proposition that it is obvious to combine the teaching of one or more 
documents with the common general knowledge in the art. It 
would, generally speaking, also be obvious to combine two 
documents one of which contains a clear and unmistakable reference 
to the other (for references which are considered an integral part of 
the disclosure, see G-IV, 5.1 and G-VI, 1). In determining whether it 
is permissible to combine a document with an item of prior art made 
public in some other way, e.g. by use, similar considerations apply. 
7. Combination vs. juxtaposition or aggregation 
The invention claimed must normally be considered as a whole. When a 
claim consists of a "combination of features", it is not correct to argue that 
the separate features of the combination taken by themselves are known or 
obvious and that "therefore" the whole subject-matter claimed is obvious. 
However, where the claim is merely an "aggregation or juxtaposition of 
features" and not a true combination, it is enough to show that the 
individual features are obvious to prove that the aggregation of features 
does not involve an inventive step (see G-VII, 5.2, last paragraph). A set of 
technical features is regarded as a combination of features if the functional 
interaction between the features achieves a combined technical effect 
which is different from, e.g. greater than, the sum of the technical effects of 
the individual features. In other words, the interactions of the individual 
features must produce a synergistic effect. If no such synergistic effect 
exists, there is no more than a mere aggregation of features (see T 389/86 
and T 204/06). 
For example, the technical effect of an individual transistor is essentially 
that of an electronic switch. However, transistors interconnected to form a 
microprocessor synergically interact to achieve technical effects, such as 
data processing, which are over and above the sum of their respective 
individual technical effects (see also G-VII, Annex, 2). 
According to T 9/81, patentability has been accepted for a preparation in 
the form of a "kit-of-parts" in which the individual active compounds, 
representing known therapeutic agents, are physically separated, provided 
that the use of those compounds, either simultaneously, separately or 
sequentially, produces a new and unexpected joint therapeutic effect which 
cannot be attained by the compounds independently of each other. 
Part G – Chapter VII-22 

 
 
8. 
"Ex post facto" analysis 
An invention which at first sight appears obvious might in fact involve an 
inventive step. Once a new idea has been formulated, it can often be 
shown theoretically how it might be arrived at, starting from something 
known, by a series of apparently easy steps. The examiner must be wary of 
ex post facto analysis of this kind. When combining documents cited in the 
search report, it always has to be borne in mind that the documents 
produced in the search have, of necessity, been obtained with 
foreknowledge of what matter constitutes the alleged invention. In all cases 
the examiner must attempt to visualise the overall state of the art 
confronting the skilled person before the applicant's contribution, and must 
seek to make a "real-life" assessment of this and other relevant factors. 
The examiner has to take into account all that is known concerning the 
background of the invention and give fair weight to relevant arguments or 
evidence submitted by the applicant. If, for example, an invention is shown 
to be of considerable technical value, and particularly if it provides a 
technical advantage which is new and surprising and which is not merely 
achieved as a bonus effect in a "one-way street" situation (see G-VII, 10.2), 
and this technical advantage can convincingly be related to one or more of 
the features included in the claim defining the invention, the examiner has 
to be hesitant in pursuing an objection that such a claim lacks inventive 
step. 
9. 
Origin of an invention 
While the claim must in each case be directed to technical features (and 
not, for example, merely to an idea), in order to assess whether an 
inventive step is present it is important for the examiner to bear in mind that 
an invention may, for example, be based on the following: 
(i) 
the devising of a solution to a known problem; 
Example: the problem of permanently marking farm animals such as 
cows without causing pain to the animals or damage to the hide has 
existed since farming began. The solution ("freeze-branding") 
consists in applying the discovery that the hide can be permanently 
depigmented by freezing. 
(ii) 
the arrival at an insight into the cause of an observed phenomenon 
(the practical use of this phenomenon then being obvious); 
Example: the agreeable flavour of butter is found to be caused by 
minute quantities of a particular compound. As soon as this insight 
has been arrived at, the technical application comprising adding this 
compound to margarine is immediately obvious. 
Many inventions are of course based on a combination of the above 
possibilities – e.g. the arrival at an insight and the technical application of 
that insight may both involve the use of the inventive faculty. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-23 
 
10. Secondary indicators 
10.1 Predictable disadvantage; non-functional modification; arbitrary 
choice 
If an invention is the result of a foreseeable disadvantageous modification 
of the closest prior art, which the skilled person could clearly predict and 
correctly assess, and if this predictable disadvantage is not accompanied 
by an unexpected technical advantage, then the claimed invention does not 
involve an inventive step (see T 119/82 and T 155/85). In other words, a 
mere foreseeable worsening of the prior art does not involve an inventive 
step. However, if this worsening is accompanied by an unexpected 
technical advantage, an inventive step might be present. Similar 
considerations apply to the case where an invention is merely the result of 
an arbitrary non-functional modification of a prior-art device or of a mere 
arbitrary choice from a host of possible solutions (see T 72/95 and 
T 939/92). 
10.2 Unexpected technical effect; bonus effect 
An unexpected technical effect may be regarded as an indication of 
inventive step. It must, however, derive from the subject-matter as claimed, 
not merely from some additional features which are mentioned only in the 
description. The unexpected effect must be based on the characterising 
features of the invention, in combination with the known features of the 
claim. It cannot be based merely on features which are, in combination, 
already comprised in the prior art. 
However, if, having regard to the state of the art, it would already have 
been obvious for a skilled person to arrive at something falling within the 
terms of a claim, for example due to a lack of alternatives thereby creating 
a "one-way street" situation, the unexpected effect is merely a bonus effect 
which does not confer inventiveness on the claimed subject-matter 
(see T 231/97 and T 192/82). If the skilled person would have to choose 
from a range of possibilities, there is no one-way street situation and the 
unexpected effect may very well lead to the recognition of an inventive 
step. 
The unexpected property or effect must be described in precise terms. A 
vague statement such as "The new compounds have shown unexpectedly 
good pharmaceutical properties" cannot support the presence of an 
inventive step. 
However, the product or process does not have to be "better" than known 
products or processes. It is sufficient that the property or effect would not 
have been expected. 
10.3 Long-felt need; commercial success 
Where the invention solves a technical problem which workers in the art 
have been attempting to solve for a long time, or otherwise fulfils a long-felt 
need, this may be regarded as an indication of inventive step. 
Commercial success alone is not to be regarded as indicative of inventive 
step, but evidence of immediate commercial success when coupled with 
Part G – Chapter VII-24 

 
 
evidence of a long-felt want is of relevance provided the examiner is 
satisfied that the success derives from the technical features of the 
invention and not from other influences (e.g. selling techniques or 
advertising). 
11. Arguments and evidence submitted by the applicant 
The relevant arguments and evidence to be considered by the examiner for 
assessing inventive step may be either taken from the originally-filed patent 
application or submitted by the applicant during the subsequent 
proceedings (see G-VII, 5.2 and H-V, 2.2 and 2.4). 
Care must be taken, however, whenever new effects in support of inventive 
step are referred to. Such new effects can only be taken into account if the 
skilled person, having the common general knowledge at the effective filing 
date in mind, and based on the application as originally filed, would derive 
said effect as being encompassed by the technical teaching and embodied 
by the same originally disclosed invention (G 2/21, Headnote II). 
Any evidence submitted to prove a technical effect that can be taken into 
account for the assessment of inventive step is assessed in accordance 
with the principle of free evaluation of evidence. Such evidence may not be 
disregarded solely on the ground that it is post-published (G 2/21). 
Example of such a new effect: 
The invention as filed relates to a pharmaceutical composition having a 
specific activity. At first sight, having regard to the relevant prior art, it would 
appear that there is a lack of inventive step. Subsequently, the applicant 
submits new evidence which shows that the claimed composition exhibits 
an unexpected advantage in terms of low toxicity. In this case, it is 
allowable to reformulate the technical problem by including the aspect of 
toxicity, since pharmaceutical activity and toxicity are related in the sense 
that the skilled person would always contemplate the two aspects together. 
The reformulation of the technical problem may or may not give rise to 
amendment or insertion of the statement of the technical problem in the 
description. Any such amendment is only allowable if it satisfies the 
conditions listed in H-V, 2.4. In the above example of a pharmaceutical 
composition, neither the reformulated problem nor the information on 
toxicity could be introduced into the description without infringing 
Art. 123(2). 
12. Selection inventions 
The subject-matter of selection inventions differs from the closest prior art 
in that it represents selected subsets or sub-ranges. For the assessment of 
novelty, see G-VI, 7. If this selection is connected to a particular technical 
effect, and if no hints exist leading the skilled person to the selection, then 
an inventive step is accepted (this technical effect occurring within the 
selected range may also be the same effect as attained with the broader 
known range, but to an unexpected degree). The criterion of "seriously 
contemplating" mentioned in connection with the test for novelty of 
overlapping ranges must not be confused with the assessment of inventive 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-25 
 
step. For inventive step, it has to be considered whether the skilled person 
would have made the selection or would have chosen the overlapping 
range in the expectation of some improvement or advantage. If the answer 
is negative, then the claimed matter involves an inventive step. 
The unexpected technical effect must apply to the entire range as claimed. 
If it occurs in only part of the claimed range, the claimed subject-matter 
does not solve the specific problem to which the effect relates, but only the 
more general problem of obtaining, for example, "a further product X" or "a 
further process Y" (see T 939/92). 
13. Inventive step assessment in the field of biotechnology 
In the field of biotechnology, obviousness is considered at hand not only 
when results are clearly predictable, but also when there is a reasonable 
expectation of success. In order to render a solution obvious, it is sufficient 
to establish that the skilled person would have followed the teaching of the 
prior art with a reasonable expectation of success. Likewise, a mere "try 
and see" attitude in light of the closest prior art does not necessarily render 
the solution inventive. 
On the other hand, a "reasonable expectation of success" is not to be 
confused with the "hope to succeed". If researchers are aware when 
embarking on their research that, in order to reach a technical solution, they 
will need not only technical skill but also the ability to make the right 
non-trivial decisions along the way, this cannot be regarded as a 
"reasonable expectation of success". 
For the assessment of inventive step of antibodies, see G-II, 6.2. 
14. Dependent claims; claims in different categories 
If the subject-matter of an independent claim is new and non-obvious, there 
is no need to investigate the novelty and non-obviousness of the 
subject-matter of any claims dependent thereon, except in situations where 
the subject-matter of a dependent claim has a later effective date than the 
independent claim and intermediate documents are to be considered 
(see F-VI, 2.4.3). 
Similarly, if the subject-matter of a claim to a product is new and 
non-obvious 
there 
is 
no 
need 
to 
investigate 
the 
novelty 
and 
non-obviousness of the subject-matter of any claims for a process which 
inevitably results in the manufacture of that product or of any claims for a 
use of that product. In particular, analogy processes, i.e. processes which 
themselves would otherwise not involve an inventive step, are nevertheless 
patentable in so far as they provide a novel and inventive product 
(see T 119/82). However, in cases where the product, process and use 
claims have different effective dates, a separate examination as to novelty 
and inventive step may still be necessary in view of intermediate 
documents. 
Part G – Chapter VII-26 

 
 
15. Examples 
The annex to this chapter gives examples of circumstances where an 
invention may be regarded as obvious or where it may involve an inventive 
step. It is to be stressed that these examples are only for illustrative 
purposes and that the applicable principle in each case is "was it obvious to 
a person skilled in the art?" (see G-VII, 5). Examiners must avoid attempts 
to fit a particular case into one of these examples if it is not clearly 
applicable. Also, the list is not exhaustive. 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-27 
 
Annex 
Examples relating to the requirement of inventive step – indicators 
1. Application of known measures? 
1.1 Inventions involving the application of known measures in an obvious 
way and in respect of which an inventive step is therefore to be ruled out: 
(i) 
The teaching of a prior-art document is incomplete and at least one 
of the possible ways of "filling the gap" which would naturally or 
readily occur to the skilled person results in the invention. 
Example: The invention relates to a building structure made from 
aluminium. A prior-art document discloses the same structure and 
says that it is of light-weight material but fails to mention the use of 
aluminium. 
(ii) 
The invention differs from the known art merely in the use of 
well-known equivalents (mechanical, electrical or chemical). 
Example: The invention relates to a pump which differs from a known 
pump solely in that its motive power is provided by a hydraulic motor 
instead of an electric motor. 
(iii) 
The invention consists merely in a new use of a well-known material 
employing the known properties of that material. 
Example: Washing composition containing as detergent a known 
compound having the known property of lowering the surface tension 
of water, this property being known to be an essential one for 
detergents. 
(iv) 
The invention consists in the substitution in a known device of a 
recently developed material whose properties make it plainly suitable 
for that use ("analogous substitution"). 
Example: An electric cable comprises a polyethylene sheath bonded 
to a metallic shield by an adhesive. The invention lies in the use of a 
particular newly developed adhesive known to be suitable for 
polymer-metal bonding. 
(v) 
The invention consists merely in the use of a known technique in a 
closely analogous situation ("analogous use"). 
Example: The invention resides in the application of a pulse control 
technique to the electric motor driving the auxiliary mechanisms of an 
industrial truck, such as a fork-lift truck, the use of this technique to 
control the electric propulsion motor of the truck being already 
known. 
Part G – Chapter VII-28 

 
 
1.2 Inventions involving the application of known measures in a 
non-obvious way and in respect of which an inventive step is therefore to 
be recognised: 
(i) 
A known working method or means when used for a different 
purpose involves a new, surprising effect. 
Example: It is known that high-frequency power can be used in 
inductive butt welding. It should therefore be obvious that 
high-frequency power could also be used in conductive butt welding 
with similar effect. However, if high-frequency power were used for 
the continuous conductive butt welding of coiled strip but without 
removing scale (such scale removal normally being necessary during 
conductive welding in order to avoid arcing between the welding 
contact and the strip), there is the unexpected additional effect that 
scale removal is found to be unnecessary because at high frequency 
the current is supplied in a predominantly capacitive manner via the 
scale which forms a dielectric. In that case, an inventive step would 
exist. 
(ii) 
A new use of a known device or material involves overcoming 
technical difficulties not resolvable by routine techniques. 
Example: The invention relates to a device for supporting and 
controlling the rise and fall of gas holders, enabling the previously 
employed external guiding framework to be dispensed with. A similar 
device was known for supporting floating docks or pontoons but 
practical difficulties not encountered in the known applications 
needed to be overcome in applying the device to a gas holder. 
2. Obvious combination of features? 
2.1 Obvious and consequently non-inventive combination of features: 
The invention consists merely in the juxtaposition or association of known 
devices or processes functioning in their normal way and not producing any 
non-obvious working interrelationship. 
Example: Machine for producing sausages consists of a known mincing 
machine and a known filling machine disposed side by side. 
2.2 Not obvious and consequently inventive combination of features: 
The combined features mutually support each other in their effects to such 
an extent that a new technical result is achieved. It is irrelevant whether 
each individual feature is fully or partly known by itself. However, if the 
combination of features is a bonus effect, e.g. as the result of a "one-way 
street" situation, the combination might lack an inventive step. 
Example: A mixture of medicines consists of a painkiller (analgesic) and a 
tranquilliser (sedative). It was found that through the addition of the 
tranquilliser, which intrinsically appeared to have no painkilling effect, the 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-29 
 
analgesic effect of the painkiller was intensified in a way which could not 
have been predicted from the known properties of the active substances. 
3. Obvious selection? 
3.1 Obvious and consequently non-inventive selection among a number 
of known possibilities: 
(i) 
The invention consists merely in choosing from a number of equally 
likely alternatives. 
Example: The invention relates to a known chemical process in 
which it is known to supply heat electrically to the reaction mixture. 
There are a number of well-known alternative ways of so supplying 
the heat, and the invention resides merely in the choice of one 
alternative. 
(ii) 
The invention resides in the choice of particular dimensions, 
temperature ranges or other parameters from a limited range of 
possibilities, and it is clear that these parameters could be arrived at 
by routine trial and error or by the application of normal design 
procedures. 
Example: The invention relates to a process for carrying out a known 
reaction and is characterised by a specified rate of flow of an inert 
gas. The prescribed rates are merely those which would necessarily 
be arrived at by the skilled practitioner. 
(iii) 
The invention can be arrived at merely by a simple extrapolation in 
a straightforward way from the known art. 
Example: The invention is characterised by the use of a specified 
minimum content of a substance X in a preparation Y in order to 
improve its thermal stability, and this characterising feature can be 
derived merely by extrapolation on a straight-line graph, obtainable 
from the known art, relating thermal stability to the content of 
substance X. 
(iv) 
The invention consists merely in selecting particular chemical 
compounds or compositions (including alloys) from a broad field. 
Example: The prior art includes disclosure of a chemical compound 
characterised by a specified structure including a substituent group 
designated "R". This substituent "R" is defined so as to embrace 
entire ranges of broadly-defined radical groups such as all alkyl or 
aryl radicals either unsubstituted or substituted by halogen and/or 
hydroxy, although for practical reasons only a very small number of 
specific examples are given. The invention consists in the selection 
of a particular radical or particular group of radicals from amongst 
those referred to as the substituent "R" (the selected radical or group 
of radicals not being specifically disclosed in the prior-art document 
Part G – Chapter VII-30 

 
 
since the question would then be one of lack of novelty rather than 
obviousness). The resulting compounds: 
(a) 
are neither described as having nor shown to possess any 
advantageous properties not possessed by the prior-art 
examples; or 
(b) 
are described as possessing advantageous properties 
compared with the compounds specifically referred to in the 
prior art, but these properties are ones which the persons 
skilled in the art would expect such compounds to possess, so 
that they are likely to be led to make this selection. 
(v) 
The invention follows inevitably from developments in the prior art, in 
such a way that there was no choice between several possibilities 
(the "one-way street" situation). 
Example: From the prior art it is known that when you reach a 
particular compound in a series of known chemical compounds, 
expressed in terms of the number of carbon atoms, there is a 
consistently increasing insecticidal effect as you move up the series. 
With regard to insecticidal effect, the next member of the series after 
the member previously known then lies in a "one-way street". If this 
member of the series, in addition to exhibiting the expected 
enhanced insecticidal effect, proves also to have the unexpected 
effect of being selective, i.e. of killing some insects but not others, it 
nevertheless remains obvious. 
3.2 Not obvious and consequently inventive selection among a number of 
known possibilities: 
(i) 
The invention involves special selection in a process of particular 
operating conditions (e.g. temperature and pressure) within a known 
range, such selection producing unexpected effects in the operation 
of the process or the properties of the resulting product. 
Example: In a process where substance A and substance B are 
transformed at high temperature into substance C, it was known that 
there is in general a constantly increased yield of substance C as the 
temperature increases in the range between 50 and 130°C. It is now 
found that in the temperature range from 63 to 65°C, which 
previously had not been explored, the yield of substance C was 
considerably higher than expected. 
(ii) 
The invention consists in selecting particular chemical compounds 
or compositions (including alloys) from a broad field, such 
compounds or compositions having unexpected advantages. 
Example: In the example of a substituted chemical compound given 
at G-VII, Annex, 3.1(iv) above, the invention again resides in the 
selection of the substituent radical "R" from the total field of 
possibilities defined in the prior disclosure. In this case, however, not 
 

Part G – Chapter VII-31 
 
only does the selection embrace a particular area of the possible 
field, and result in compounds that can be shown to possess 
advantageous properties (see G-VII, 10 and H-V, 2.2) but there are 
no indications which would lead the person skilled in the art to this 
particular selection rather than any other in order to achieve the 
advantageous properties. 
4. Overcoming a technical prejudice? 
As a general rule, there is an inventive step if the prior art leads the person 
skilled in the art away from the procedure proposed by the invention. This 
applies in particular when the skilled person would not even consider 
carrying out experiments to determine whether these were alternatives to 
the known way of overcoming a real or imagined technical obstacle. 
Example: Drinks containing carbon dioxide are, after being sterilised, 
bottled while hot in sterilised bottles. The general opinion is that 
immediately after withdrawal of the bottle from the filling device the bottled 
drink must be automatically shielded from the outside air so as to prevent 
the bottled drink from spurting out. A process involving the same steps but 
in which no precautions are taken to shield the drink from the outside air 
(because none are in fact necessary) would therefore be inventive.  
 
 
Part H – Chapter I-1 
 
Chapter I – The right to amend 
A European patent application or European patent may be amended in 
examination, opposition and limitation proceedings. With regard to 
amendments filed in such proceedings, there are a number of important 
aspects to consider. Firstly, amendments must be admissible, i.e. they 
must meet the requirements for being admitted into the proceedings (see 
H-II, H-III). 
Secondly, amendments must be allowable, which means, in particular, that 
they must not: 
(i) 
add to the application or patent subject-matter which was not 
disclosed in the application as originally filed (Art. 123(2)) 
(ii) 
introduce other deficiencies (such as lack of clarity in the claims – 
Art. 84) 
(iii) 
extend the protection conferred by a granted patent (Art. 123(3)). 
Chapters H-II and H-III deal with the admissibility of amendments, while 
Chapters H-IV and H-V deal with their allowability. Chapter H-VI is 
dedicated to the correction of errors. 
 

Part H – Chapter II-1 
 
Chapter II – Admissibility of amendments – 
general rules 
1. Introduction 
How the admissibility of amendments is assessed will depend on the type 
of procedure (examination, opposition or limitation) and on the stage of the 
proceedings, as detailed in the following sections. 
2. Admissibility in the examination procedure 
2.1 Before receipt of the search report – Rule 137(1) 
In the case of a European patent application filed directly at the EPO (not 
via the PCT), it is not possible for the applicant to amend the application 
before receiving the European search report (Rule 137(1)). 
In the case of a Euro-PCT application requiring a supplementary European 
search according to Art. 153(7), the applicant may amend the originally filed 
claims, description and/or drawings before the application is subject to the 
supplementary search either by maintaining amendments filed in the 
international phase under Art. 19 PCT and/or Art. 34(2)(b) PCT or by filing 
amendments on and/or after entry into the European phase under 
Rule 159(1)(b) and/or Rule 161(2) respectively (see also E-IX, 3 and 
B-III, 3.3.2). 
For replies to an invitation under Rule 62a or 63, see H-II, 5. 
2.2 After receipt of the search report – Rule 137(2) 
After receiving the European search report and the search opinion, 
applicants must respond to the search opinion (see B-XI, 8) and may 
amend the description, claims and drawings of their own volition, provided 
that the amendment and their reply are filed within the time limit for 
responding to the search opinion (see C-II, 1, C-II, 3.1 and C-III, 2.1). 
Likewise, for applications for which no supplementary European search 
report is prepared (see B-II, 4.3) when entering the European phase from 
the PCT, the applicant is required to respond to the WO-ISA, IPER or SISR 
where the ISA and, if applicable, the IPEA or SISA was the EPO (see 
E-IX, 3.1 and 3.2). This response to the WO-ISA, IPER or SISR may 
include amendments made by the applicant of their own volition to the 
description, claims and drawings. After expiry of the relevant time limit for 
the reply (or, if the applicant waives the remainder of the reply period, after 
the reply), the applicant may amend the application only with the consent of 
the examining division. 
For applications: 
(i) 
for which no search opinion is prepared (see B-XI, 1.1 and B-XI, 7), 
(ii) 
for which a search opinion was prepared, but where the search 
report was drawn up before 1 April 2010 (in which case Rule 70a 
does not apply and the applicant is not required to respond to the 
search opinion), or 
Rule 137(1) 
Rule 137(2) 
Rule 71(1) 
Part H – Chapter II-2 

 
 
(iii) 
which enter the European phase from the PCT, where the EPO was 
the ISA, IPEA or SISA and prepared a written opinion, but for which a 
communication 
under 
Rule 161 
was 
already 
issued 
before 
1 April 2010, 
it is after receipt of the first communication from the examining division in 
examination proceedings that applicants may "of their own volition, amend 
once the description, claims and drawings", provided that the amendment 
and the reply are filed within the time limit for replying to that 
communication. 
2.3 After receipt of the first communication – Rule 137(3) 
Subsequent to the applicable event mentioned in H-II, 2.2, the prosecution 
of further amendments proposed by the applicant is within the discretion of 
the examining division. Giving the examining division this discretion is 
intended to ensure that the examination procedure is brought to a 
conclusion in as few actions as possible (see C-IV, 3). In exercising its 
discretion the examining division must consider all relevant factors; in 
particular, it must balance the applicant's interest in obtaining a patent 
which is legally valid and the EPO's interest in bringing the examination 
procedure to a close in an effective way (in accordance with the principles 
set out in G 7/93). 
Furthermore, the exercise of discretion to refuse amendments under 
Rule 137(3) must be reasoned (see T 755/96). The examining division also 
cannot refuse to admit amendments in advance (T 1105/96; T 246/08). 
As an exception to Rule 137(3), paragraph (b) of Rule 164(2) provides for a 
right to amend the application in response to the results of any search 
under Rule 164(2). This means that applicants may make amendments of 
their own volition once in response to the communication under Art. 94(3) 
to which the search results under Rule 164(2) are annexed (see also 
H-II, 6.4.1). 
If an amendment is admitted, subsequent proceedings are based on the 
description, claims and drawings as amended. Admitting an amendment 
does not necessarily imply that the application as amended is allowable, 
i.e. free from any objection under the EPC. 
In exercising its discretion under Rule 137(3), the examining division will 
take into account the circumstances of each individual case and the stage 
of the proceedings which the application has reached to date. A further 
important element is whether the applicant has already had sufficient 
opportunity to make amendments. In particular, amendments reintroducing 
deficiencies previously pointed out by the examining division and removed 
by the applicant are not admitted (see T 1326/11 and T 1064/04). 
The applicant has to bear in mind that it is easier to secure an amendment 
at an earlier rather than at a later stage: the later amendments are filed, the 
more important the aspect of procedural economy becomes in balancing 
the interest of the applicant in obtaining a patent and the EPO's interest in 
bringing the examination procedure to a close (see T 951/97 and G 7/93). 
 

Part H – Chapter II-3 
 
On the other hand, amendments limiting a claim which is already 
considered allowable are normally admitted. The same applies to 
amendments improving the clarity of the description or claims in a clearly 
desirable manner (see T 1929/13). 
If amendments clearly remedy a deficiency in response to the preceding 
communication, they are always admitted, provided they do not give rise to 
some new deficiency. 
A further factor is the amount of alteration to the application documents 
involved. Extensive reworking of the description or claims may be a proper 
response to highly relevant further prior art of which the applicant has only 
just become aware (e.g. either through further citation by the examining 
division or through knowledge obtained from another source). Regarding 
less extensive amendments, the examining division will adopt a reasonable 
approach, trying to balance fairness to the applicant against the need to 
avoid unnecessary delay and excessive and unjustified additional work for 
the EPO. 
Additional reasons for not admitting amendments according to Rule 137(3) 
include the non-admittance of: 
– 
auxiliary requests in certain circumstances (see H-III, 3.3.2.1), and 
– 
a request filed in, or in preparation for, oral proceedings, where 
Rule 137(4) is not complied with in respect of the request in question 
(see H-III, 2.1.3), 
for reasons of procedural economy (taking into account the applicant's right 
to comment according to Art. 113(1)). 
Further limitations may apply after a remittal by a board of appeal under 
Art. 111(2). 
2.3.1 Examples of the exercise of discretion under Rule 137(3) 
2.3.1.1 Rule 137(3) in conjunction with Art. 83 
The examining division has raised an objection under Art. 83 that the entire 
application, i.e. claims, description and drawings, does not disclose to a 
person skilled in the art how to carry out the invention without using 
inventive skill. 
The examining division will not admit any (further) amendment under 
Rule 137(3) unless the applicant is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction 
of the examining division that the application contains enough information 
to enable the person skilled in the art to carry out the invention; for example 
the applicant could demonstrate that an embodiment in the description is 
sufficiently disclosed for the person skilled in the art to put it into practice. 
If the applicant cannot demonstrate the above, then the objection under 
Art. 83 EPC can only be overcome by adding information to the application 
as filed, which usually infringes Art. 123(2) EPC. 
Art. 94(3) 
Rule 62a, 63, 137(5) 
Part H – Chapter II-4 

 
 
2.3.1.2 Rule 137(3) in conjunction with Art. 123(2) 
The examining division has raised an objection under Art. 123(2) indicating 
that a certain feature introduced into the claims extends the subject-matter 
of the application as filed. 
Unless the applicant is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 
examining division that the application as filed disclosed this feature directly 
and unambiguously, the examining division will normally not admit under 
Rule 137(3) any further set of claims containing the feature in question. 
2.3.1.3 Rule 137(3) in conjunction with Art. 84 – missing essential 
feature 
The examining division has raised an objection under Art. 84 that the 
claims are missing an essential feature (see F-IV, 4.5). 
Unless the applicant is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 
examining division that the indicated feature is not essential for carrying out 
the invention, the examining division will normally not admit under 
Rule 137(3) any further set of claims not containing the feature in question. 
2.3.1.4 Rule 137(3) in conjunction with auxiliary requests 
See H-III, 3.3.2.1. 
2.4 At an advanced stage of the proceedings 
When the applicant files an extensively revised request to replace the text 
of the application on the basis of which a patent could be granted, they 
must provide good reasons for proposing the changes only at this stage in 
the proceedings. This applies particularly in cases where the examining 
division has indicated that a version of the claims proposed by the applicant 
is grantable and that the applicant has only to bring the description into line 
with that version. Normally only those amendments which do not 
appreciably delay the preparations for grant of the patent will be admitted 
under Rule 137(3). To this end, the examining division carries out a prima 
facie analysis of the amendments to determine the amount of time their 
examination might require. It is this amount of time that determines whether 
the amendments are extensive. If the examining division comes to the 
conclusion that a request is prima facie not allowable, for example, 
because it introduces new deficiencies, they refuse the request under 
Rule 137(3). 
2.5 Amendments filed in reply to a Rule 71(3) communication 
If, in reply to the communication under Rule 71(3) and within the period 
specified in Rule 71(6), the applicant files a request for amendments and/or 
a correction of errors, the procedure is as defined in C-V, 4. This applies 
regardless of whether the request is an explicit request for amendment or is 
drafted as an approval which is conditional on the filed amendments and/or 
corrections. 
2.5.1 Criteria for admitting such amendments 
Decision G 7/93 dealt with the criteria to be applied when examining the 
admissibility of late-filed amendments in examination. The particular case 
to which that decision relates arose when the rules were differently 
Rule 137(3) 
Rule 71(6) 
 

Part H – Chapter II-5 
 
formulated, and in a situation where the applicant had already consented to 
the version proposed by the examining division. However, what was said by 
the Enlarged Board in that case can be considered generally applicable to 
new requests put forward at a late stage of the proceedings, i.e. when the 
applicant has already had at least one opportunity to amend the application 
and the examining division has already completed substantive examination 
of the application (see T 1064/04). 
In particular, applying the principles of G 7/93 to amendments filed in 
response to the communication under Rule 71(3) (see C-V, 1 to C-V, 3) 
means that this communication does not constitute an opportunity for the 
applicant to call into question the outcome of the earlier procedure. In 
deciding whether to admit such amendments, a balance must be struck 
between the applicant's interest in obtaining a patent which is valid in all of 
the designated states and the EPO's interest in bringing the examination 
procedure to a close by the issue of a decision to grant the patent. At this 
stage of the proceedings, the substantive examination has already been 
completed and the applicant has had the opportunity to amend the 
application. Therefore normally only those amendments which do not 
appreciably delay the preparations for grant of the patent will be admitted 
under Rule 137(3). 
It is, however, appropriate to admit separate sets of claims for one or more 
designated states for which prior national rights exist (see H-III, 4.4). 
The rejection of amendments proposed by the examining division in a 
Rule 71(3) communication which have been introduced without prior 
consultation and agreement of the applicant (C-V, 1.1) does not amount to 
a request for amendment to which discretion under Rule 137(3) applies. 
2.5.2 Further course of proceedings 
If the examining division gives its consent under Rule 137(3) to these 
amendments and/or the correction and considers them allowable without 
issuing a further communication under Art. 94(3), it issues a second 
communication under Rule 71(3) based on the amended/corrected text 
(see C-V, 4.6), after which it then proceeds to the grant of the patent 
pursuant to Art. 97(1). 
Where amendments or corrections are not admitted, or where they are 
admitted but not considered allowable, examination will be resumed (see 
C-V, 4.7). 
2.5.3 Exceptional case where amendments must be admitted 
If the application was one of the exceptional cases (i), (ii) or (iii) mentioned 
in H-II, 2.2 and no communication under Art. 94(3) has preceded the 
communication under Rule 71(3), the applicant may amend the description, 
claims and drawings of their own volition (see C-III, 2; see also C-II, 3.1) 
within the time limit for replying to the communication under Rule 71(3). If 
the examining division finds that these amendments are allowable, a 
second communication according to Rule 71(3) is issued based on the text 
as amended (see C-V, 4.6). 
Rule 71(3) 
Rule 137(3) 
Rule 71(6) 
Rule 71a(2) 
Rule 137(3) 
Part H – Chapter II-6 

 
 
However, if the examining division is of the opinion that the amendments 
are not allowable (a finding of inadmissibility with regard to these 
amendments not being possible), the examination procedure is normally 
resumed in accordance with C-V, 4.7. 
2.5.4 Rule 137(4) applies to amendments filed at this stage 
Amendments filed in reply to the communication under Rule 71(3) must 
satisfy the requirements of Rule 137(4) by identifying the amendments and 
indicating the basis for them in the application as filed (see H-III, 2.1 and in 
particular the transitional provisions in H-III, 2.1.4). If these requirements 
are not met: 
(i) 
if the application is of one of the types mentioned in H-III, 2.1.4, the 
examining division may send a Rule 137(4) communication before 
proceeding further, as provided for in H-III, 2.1.1; 
(ii) 
otherwise, if the basis for any amendments is not apparent, the 
examining division objects to these amendments under Art. 123(2). 
In case (i), if the applicant replies to the communication under Rule 137(4) 
in time, the examining division will then decide if it consents to the 
amendments and will proceed accordingly as indicated in C-V, 4. 
2.6 Further requests for amendment after approval 
Once the applicant has approved the text communicated to him pursuant to 
Rule 71(3), by paying the fees and filing the translation of the claims, 
further requests for amendment will only exceptionally be admitted under 
the discretionary power of the examining division given by Rule 137(3). A 
clear example of an admissible request is where the applicant files 
separate sets of claims for designated states for which prior national rights 
exist (see H-III, 4.4). Similarly, it is appropriate to admit minor amendments 
which do not require re-opening of the substantive examination and which 
do not appreciably delay the issue of the decision to grant (see G 7/93). 
If amendments are filed and do not comply with the requirements of 
Rule 137(4), the examining division may send a communication under 
Rule 137(4) (see H-III, 2.1.1). 
When exercising its discretion under Rule 137(3) an examining division 
must consider and balance the applicant's interest in obtaining a patent 
which is legally valid in all of the designated states and the EPO's interest 
in bringing the examination procedure to a close by the issue of a decision 
to grant the patent. The criteria for exercising its discretion under 
Rule 137(3) at this late stage are whether the request can be decided on in 
a reasonable period of time, and whether the amendments are allowable. If 
either of these criteria is not satisfied, the request for amendments is 
refused by the division in the exercise of its discretion according to 
Rule 137(3). 
Refusal of amendments must be reasoned, and both Art. 113(1) and 
Art. 116(1) must be observed (see C-V, 4.7.1). It must be shown that the 
conditions defined in G 7/93 are not met. This means that arguments must 
Rule 71(5) 
Rule 137(3) 
 

Part H – Chapter II-7 
 
be given as to why the amendments are not minor in nature but in fact 
necessitate resuming substantive examination while considerably delaying 
the issue of a decision to grant the patent. 
However, once the decision to grant is handed over to the EPO's internal 
postal service for transmittal to the applicant, the examining division is 
bound by it (see G 12/91) and can only amend it to the limited extent 
provided for in Rule 140 (see H-VI, 3.1). In examination procedure, this 
corresponds to the date on which the centrally generated Form 2006, 
"Decision to grant a European patent pursuant to Art. 97(1) EPC", is 
forwarded to the postal service. This date is shown at the bottom right-hand 
corner of Form 2006. The examining division is no longer competent to 
decide on a request for amendments or corrections under Rule 139 if the 
filing of the request and the completion of the proceedings occur on the 
same date (T 798/95). 
2.7 Late-filed requests after summons to oral proceedings in 
examination 
If requests are filed after the final date set in accordance with Rule 116(1), 
they are usually treated as late-filed unless a summons to oral proceedings 
was issued as the first action of the examining division. Another exception 
is a request filed in response to a change of the subject of the proceedings, 
e.g. when a further relevant document is cited for the first time during the 
oral proceedings. In such a case, the request has to be admitted under 
Rule 116(2) (T 951/97). 
The examining division will first consider the requests before deciding on 
their admissibility. The mere fact that they are filed late is not per se a 
reason for not admitting them. This issue will normally be dealt with during 
oral proceedings. 
In exercising its discretion under Rule 137(3) (see G 7/93), the examining 
division needs to take into account whether the applicant has good reasons 
for filing the request late. In the absence of such reasons, and if the 
applicant has already had sufficient opportunity to address the reasoned 
objections, when balancing the relevant interests the examining division 
may give more weight to bringing the examination procedure to a close. 
In such cases, late-filed requests will be subject to the "clear allowability" 
criterion (see H-II, 2.7.1) in addition to the criteria indicated in H-II, 2.3. 
2.7.1 Concept of "clear allowability" 
The examining division will apply the criterion of "clear allowability" in 
exercising its discretion under Rule 137(3) for treating requests filed after 
the final date set in accordance with Rule 116(1) without proper justification 
(T 153/85). 
These late-filed claims will only be admitted into the proceedings if they are 
clearly allowable. This means that it must be immediately apparent to the 
examining division that the amendments successfully overcome the 
objections without giving rise to new ones (prima facie assessment). 
Rule 140 
Part H – Chapter II-8 

 
 
For example, late-filed requests will not be admitted if they do not clearly 
meet the requirements under Art. 123(2) or Art. 84. Likewise, late-filed 
requests may be rejected if the newly defined subject-matter does not 
constitute a convergent development of the subject-matter which has been 
the subject of examination (for a definition of convergence, see 
H-III, 3.3.2.2). 
For ascertaining whether or not the claims are clearly allowable, the 
examining division must take into account the reasons given by the 
applicant which explain why the amendments have been made and how 
they are intended to overcome the objections raised. 
If, after discussions, the examining division comes to the conclusion that 
the late-filed requests are not clearly allowable, it rejects them under 
Rule 116(2) and Rule 137(3) on the grounds that they do not contain 
subject-matter which is clearly allowable, i.e. because the subject-matter 
does not clearly meet the requirements of the EPC (for cases where the 
applicant does not attend the oral proceedings, see H-III, 3.3.3 and 
E-III, 8.3.3). In the decision, reasoning is also to be given as to why the 
specific requirement(s) for allowability is (are) not met. 
The "clear allowability" criterion is generally also applied to patent 
proprietors' late-filed requests in opposition proceedings (see E-VI, 2.1, and 
E-VI, 2.2; see also T 98/96 with regard to opposition appeal proceedings). 
3. 
Admissibility in opposition procedure 
3.1 Amendments in reply to the notice of opposition 
Any amendments made in opposition proceedings must be occasioned by 
the grounds for opposition specified in Art. 100. That is to say, amendments 
are admissible only if they represent a genuine attempt to overcome a 
ground for opposition. However, the ground for opposition does not actually 
have to have been invoked by the opponent. For example, in opposition 
proceedings admissibly opened on grounds of non-patentability, the patent 
proprietor can also submit amendments to remove added subject-matter. 
Opposition proceedings cannot be used merely to tidy up and improve the 
disclosure in the patent specification (see T 127/85). The mere addition of 
new claims to the claims as granted is inadmissible because such 
amendments cannot be said to meet a ground for opposition. However, the 
replacement of one independent claim as granted by multiple, e.g. two, 
independent claims each directed to a respective specific embodiment 
covered by the independent claim as granted is admissible if such a 
replacement is occasioned by a ground for opposition specified in Art. 100 
(see T 223/97). 
3.2 Amendments not related to the grounds for opposition 
If the proprietor proposes amendments to the patent in reply to the grounds 
for opposition and the opposition division intends to maintain the patent in 
amended form pursuant to those grounds, other amendments not related to 
the grounds for opposition (e.g. clarifications), or corrections (H-VI, 3.1), 
may be allowed provided that the patent thus amended still fulfils the 
requirements of the EPC and that the amendments are considered 
Rule 80 
 

Part H – Chapter II-9 
 
necessary and appropriate. In particular, if one part of a claim has been 
amended, it may be necessary or appropriate to amend other parts of the 
claim as well. 
Moreover, where a "clarification" can be considered as a limitation of the 
claim, it would be admissible under Rule 80 and could form the basis for 
maintaining the patent in amended form, provided the other requirements of 
the EPC are also met by the amended text (with the exception of unity of 
invention – G 1/91). If the division is of the opinion that such a limiting 
clarification is not necessary, it needs to consider that the practice of 
interpreting a claim in a contracting state may be quite different from that of 
the EPO, and hence the patentee may see a need for such a limiting 
clarification. 
Such amendments, however, are not proposed by the opposition division 
and they can only be taken into consideration up to the pronouncement of 
the decision (in oral proceedings) or until the date the decision is handed 
over to the EPO's internal postal service for transmittal to the parties (in 
written proceedings) (see G 12/91). 
If an otherwise allowable request for maintenance of the opposed patent 
either as granted or in amended form has been submitted, the following 
amendments are not allowed: 
(a) 
filing of further claims (see T 829/93); 
(b) 
comprehensive redrafting of the dependent claims; 
(c) 
comprehensive redrafting of the description (see D-V, 5). 
In the absence of any amendments submitted by the patent proprietor with 
a view to meeting the grounds for opposition, there is no possibility to make 
any other amendments (see for example T 223/97). Publication errors and 
exceptionally 
formatting/editing 
errors 
may 
however 
be 
corrected 
(see H-VI, 4). 
3.3 Amendments occasioned by national rights 
Apart from the above (H-II, 3.1 and H-II, 3.2), amendments occasioned by 
national rights of earlier date are admissible pursuant to Rule 138 (see also 
G-IV, 6, H-III, 4.4 and H-III, 4.5). 
3.4 Insistence on inadmissible amendments 
If the patent proprietors request amendments going beyond those 
permissible under Rule 80 (see H-II, 3.1 and H-II, 3.2), they are invited to 
withdraw them. If they then maintain their request, it is not admitted (for the 
reasoning 
see 
for 
example 
T 127/85, 
Headnote, 
and 
T 406/86, 
Headnote 1). 
If, in addition to requests containing unnecessary amendments, there is an 
auxiliary request which meets the requirements of the Convention and in 
particular does not comprise amendments not complying with Rule 80, the 
Part H – Chapter II-10 

 
 
decision must include the grounds for not admitting the higher-ranking 
requests. 
It may occur that there is only one request which would be allowable, but 
for amendments which clearly do not comply with Rule 80. If the 
amendments cannot be admitted, the opposition division explains to the 
patentee that revocation of the patent is to be expected solely for reasons 
of the request's non-compliance with Rule 80. 
3.5 Late-filed requests in opposition proceedings 
With respect to how late-filed requests are dealt with in opposition 
proceedings, reference is made to E-VI, 2.1 (general examples) and 
E-VI, 2.2 (examples concerning oral proceedings). 
4. 
Amendments in limitation procedure 
For admissibility of amendments in the limitation procedure, reference is 
made to D-X, 4 and D-X, 10. 
5. 
Amendments required by a limitation of the search under Rule 62a 
and/or Rule 63 
Where the search was limited to certain subject-matter by application of 
Rule 63 (see B-VIII, 3.1 and 3.2), the claims must be amended in such a 
way as to remove the unsearched subject-matter and the description 
adapted accordingly. 
Where the search was limited to certain claims by application of Rule 62a 
(see B-VIII, 4.1 and 4.2), the claims must be amended in such a way as to 
remove the unsearched independent claims and the description adapted 
accordingly. To this end, the claims may be amended, for example, by 
deleting an unsearched independent claim or, where this complies with 
Art. 123(2) and Art. 84, by making an unsearched independent claim 
dependent on another independent claim of the same category which has 
been searched. 
In both of these cases, a specific amendment is necessary unless the 
examining division finds that the limitation of the search under Rule 62a 
and/or Rule 63 or the declaration of no search under Rule 63 was not 
justified, e.g. in view of arguments provided by the applicant. 
Such amendments may, however, be made only in examination 
proceedings or, preferably, in reply to the search opinion (see F-IV, 3.3). 
Since the applicant may not amend the claims before receipt of the search 
report (Rule 137(1)), any claims filed in reply to an invitation under 
Rule 62a or Rule 63 will be taken only as an indication of what the applicant 
wants the EPO to search and dealt with accordingly (see B-VIII, 3.2 and 
B-VIII, 4.2). The applicant will then have to confirm maintenance of these 
amendments formally on entry into the examination phase (see A-V, 2.2). 
Rule 63(3) 
Rule 62a(2) 
 

Part H – Chapter II-11 
 
6. Amendments in the case of non-unity 
6.1 Restriction to a single, searched invention 
In reply to an objection of lack of unity, the applicant must restrict the claims 
to a single invention which has been searched unless the applicant can 
convince the examining division that the objection was not justified. 
If the claims have been restricted to a single searched invention, the 
examination can be continued as for a unitary application but limited to that 
invention (see C-III, 3). If the objection is withdrawn in view of the 
arguments put forward by the applicant, an additional search may be 
necessary (see C-IV, 7.3) in order for the examination of the claimed 
invention to be continued. 
However, if in response to a negative opinion concerning that invention the 
applicant later amends the claims to switch to a different searched 
invention, the division will exercise its discretion under Rule 137(3) and 
refuse to admit the amendments since only one invention in each 
application can be examined for conformity with the requirements of the 
EPC (see G 2/92 and T 158/12). 
6.2 Restriction to an unsearched invention 
If not all of the claimed inventions have been searched, in accordance with 
G 2/92 the applicant must restrict the claims to one of the searched 
inventions. Thus, if in reply to the search opinion the applicant then restricts 
the claims to one of the originally claimed inventions which has not been 
searched, the examining division will write a first communication repeating 
the lack-of-unity objection raised in the search opinion. Any arguments of 
the applicant must be duly considered and dealt with in the communication. 
If the application is restricted to an unsearched but originally claimed 
invention, it can be refused under Rule 64 in line with G 2/92 (subject to the 
applicant's rights under Art. 113(1) and Art. 116(1)). 
Rule 137(5) cannot be invoked. It does not apply when the applicant has 
not paid the search fee in respect of a non-unitary invention relating to the 
originally filed claims. 
If the application is a Euro-PCT application (see also H-II, 6.4) the 
examining division, depending on the case: 
– 
either objects under Rule 164(2)(c) to the restriction of the claims to 
an invention searched neither (on grounds of lack of unity) by the 
EPO as (Supplementary) International Searching Authority nor as 
part of a search under Rule 164(2)(a), 
– 
or objects under Rule 164(1) in line with G 2/92 in the context of a 
supplementary search in the European phase (see B-II, 4.3.2, 
B-VII, 2.3 and E-IX, 4.2). 
Part H – Chapter II-12 

 
 
In both cases, if the applicant declines to limit the claims to a searched 
invention, the application is refused under Rule 164 in accordance with 
G 2/92 (subject to the applicant's rights under Art. 113(1) and Art. 116(1)). 
The objection under Rule 164(2)(c) mentioned above is drafted in the 
communication sent under Rule 164(2)(b) issuing the results of any 
additional search. If the applicant does not reply to the invitation to pay 
additional search fees under Rule 164(2)(a), they do not receive a 
communication under Rule 164(2)(b). In this case, the examining division 
issues a communication under Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1) and (2) inviting the 
applicant to limit the application under Rule 164(2)(c) before the application 
can be refused. 
Concerning the application of G 2/92, it is to be kept in mind that the 
prohibition on pursuing an application for subject-matter for which no 
search fees have been paid applies to inventions; it does not apply to 
features which were originally claimed with a different invention and had not 
been searched, but which were originally disclosed in combination with the 
searched invention or group of inventions (see T 998/14). 
6.3 No restriction to a single invention searched 
If in response to the search opinion the applicant does not restrict the 
application to a single invention searched, the objection of lack of unity 
raised at the search stage will be reviewed and if the examining division 
considers that it remains valid, a first communication repeating the 
lack-of-unity objection raised in the search opinion will be issued. 
In Rule 164(2) cases, a lack of unity objection is addressed in the 
communication under Rule 164(2)(b) (see also H-II, 6.4.1). 
If the applicant does not restrict the application at all, or does restrict it, but 
still maintains two or more inventions, the application can be refused under 
Art. 82 (subject to the applicant's rights under Art. 113(1) and 116(1)). 
If the claims still cover an unsearched invention, an objection under Rule 64 
would also apply, in line with decision G 2/92 as discussed in H-II, 6.2. 
If the claims have not been simply restricted, but have instead, or 
additionally, been amended, such amendments can often result in the 
previously raised lack-of-unity objection no longer being valid, or in the 
arguments on which the objection was based no longer being complete. 
Such amendments would thus result in the objection having to be either 
withdrawn or at least newly argued. 
Sometimes lack of unity of invention arises only during substantive 
examination, for example following an amendment of one or more claims 
so as to overcome an objection of lack of inventive step. In such situations 
the examining division may raise an objection, but only in very clear cases. 
 

Part H – Chapter II-13 
 
6.4 Further procedural aspects concerning Euro-PCT applications 
6.4.1 Where the EPO does not perform a supplementary search 
Where the EPO does not perform a supplementary search, the application 
must be limited to an invention searched either in the international phase by 
the EPO or in the European phase in a search under Rule 164(2)(a). The 
above principles (H-II, 6.1 to H-II, 6.3) then apply mutatis mutandis (see 
also E-IX, 4.2). 
In Rule 164(2) cases, a further communication according to Art. 94(3) and 
Rules 71(1) and (2) repeating a lack of unity objection is not necessary, as 
a communication according to Art. 94(3) and Rule 71(1) and Rule 71(2) 
addressing (also) unity of invention has already been issued under 
Rule 164(2)(b) (see also H-II, 2.3 and 6.2). 
6.4.2 Where the EPO performs a supplementary search 
Where the EPO performs a supplementary search on an application which 
is considered to lack unity, the applicant will be invited to pay additional 
fees, and the supplementary search report will be established for those 
inventions for which a search fee has been paid. The application must then 
be limited to one of the inventions searched in the supplementary search. 
The above principles (H-II, 6.1 to 6.3) then apply mutatis mutandis (see 
also E-IX, 4.2). 
 

Part H – Chapter III-1 
 
Chapter III – Admissibility of amendments – 
other procedural matters 
1. Introduction 
This chapter deals with procedural matters and formal requirements 
relating to the admissibility of amendments. An important requirement dealt 
with is the applicant's obligation to identify amendments and indicate the 
basis for them in the application as filed (Rule 137(4); for transitional 
provisions, see H-III, 2.1.4). The chapter also deals with the format of and 
procedure for making amendments, as well as issues relating to auxiliary 
requests and how to deal with different texts for different contracting states. 
2. Procedure for amendments to documents 
2.1 Indication of amendments and their basis under Rule 137(4) 
When filing amendments, the applicant must identify them and indicate the 
basis for them in order to enable the division to assess compliance of the 
amendments with the provisions of Art. 123(2). To this end, the division 
may request that amendments have to be indicated either with respect to 
the immediate previous amendments in the sequence or with respect to the 
application as filed. The requirement to indicate amendments is to be 
understood as an opportunity for the applicant to provide convincing 
arguments to the division as to why the amendment(s) is/are directly and 
unambiguously derivable from the application as filed. These arguments 
are particularly important for the outcome of the division's assessment of 
Art. 123(2) where literal support for the amendment(s) is not present in the 
application as filed. 
The requirement that the basis for amendments be indicated is met if, on 
consulting those parts of the application indicated, it is not necessary to 
look further in order to assess the amendment's compliance with 
Art. 123(2). Non-specific indications such as "see the description as filed" 
or "see the claims as filed" or "see the examples as filed" are generally not 
considered sufficient. This requirement also applies in cases where the 
applicant requests the examining division to amend the application (see 
H-III, 2.4). 
Whether the requirements of Rule 137(4) are met is assessed 
independently of whether the amendments in question comply with 
Art. 123(2). For example, the applicant may indicate that a particular 
amendment is based on a technical feature disclosed only in a schematic 
drawing. If the feature supposedly forming the basis for the amendment is 
indeed disclosed in the drawing indicated by the applicant, the 
requirements of Rule 137(4) are met, irrespective of whether the 
amendment based on that technical feature is allowable according to 
Art. 123(2). 
Where the application was not filed in an official language of the EPO, in 
the absence of evidence to the contrary, for the purpose of assessing 
compliance with Art. 123(2) the EPO assumes that any translation of the 
application as filed is accurate. Consequently, in order to comply with 
Rule 137(4) 
Rule 7 
Part H – Chapter III-2 

 
 
Rule 137(4) it is sufficient to indicate the basis of an amendment in the 
translation of the application as filed. 
2.1.1 Rule 137(4) communication and response thereto 
If the amendments and/or their basis cannot be properly identified such that 
compliance with Art. 123(2) cannot be assessed, the examining division 
notes a failure to meet either requirement of Rule 137(4). It consequently 
issues a communication requesting the correction of this deficiency within a 
period of one month. The amendments in respect of which such a 
communication may be sent include, inter alia: 
(i) 
claims filed after the date of filing under Rule 58 (see A-III, 15) 
(ii) 
amendments filed before entry into the European phase from the 
PCT under Art. 19 PCT and/or Art. 34 PCT, if maintained on entry 
(see E-IX, 3) 
(iii) 
amendments filed on entry into the European phase from the PCT 
under Art. 28 PCT or Art. 41 PCT (see E-IX, 3) 
(iv) 
amendments filed after entry into the European phase from the PCT 
under Rule 161(1) or Rule 161(2) (see E-IX, 3) 
(v) 
amendments filed in response to the search opinion (see B-XI, 8) 
(vi) 
amendments filed during the examination procedure (see, however, 
H-III, 2.1.3), including those filed after the communication according 
to Rule 71(3). 
Such a communication can only be sent in respect of amendments which 
are part of a current request. It cannot relate to amendments which have 
since been withdrawn or superseded. A communication under Rule 137(4) 
can only be issued by the examining division (see B-XI, 2).  
If the applicant fails to comply with either requirement of Rule 137(4) within 
the above-mentioned period of one month, the application is deemed to be 
withdrawn, because the applicant is considered not to have replied to the 
communication from the examining division. The applicant may request 
further processing for failure to observe this time limit (see E-VIII, 2). 
If the amendments are filed in response to a communication according to 
Rule 71(3) and the requirements of Rule 137(4) are not satisfied in respect 
of them, the examining division may send a Rule 137(4) communication. 
Thereafter, if the applicant replies in time, the examining division will then 
decide whether to admit the amendments (see H-II, 2.5.4). 
Regarding the application of Rule 137(4) to auxiliary requests, see 
H-III, 3.3.1. 
Rule 137(4) 
Art. 94(4) 
 

Part H – Chapter III-3 
 
2.1.2 Amendments withdrawn or superseded in the Rule 137(4) 
period 
If the applicant replies in time to the Rule 137(4) communication by 
withdrawing the amendments in respect of which the communication was 
sent but without identifying those amendments or indicating their basis in 
the application as filed, then no loss of rights will occur according to 
Rule 137(4). However, where the withdrawal results in the re-introduction of 
subject-matter that has already been objected to, the amendment 
introducing this subject-matter may be deemed to be inadmissible 
according to Rule 137(3) (see H-II, 2.3). 
No further Rule 137(4) communication will be sent in respect of further 
amendments filed in a timely response to the Rule 137(4) communication. 
By the expiry of the one-month period, the applicant must have identified 
and indicated the basis of: 
(i) 
amendments in respect of which the Rule 137(4) communication was 
sent and which are not superseded by further amendments filed 
during the one-month period under Rule 137(4), and 
(ii) 
amendments filed during that one-month period. 
The applicant does not need to comply with Rule 137(4) in respect of 
amendments which are superseded by further amendments filed in the 
one-month period. For example: 
3 June 2020 
Application filed: 10 claims 
25 March 2021 
Extended European search report drawn up 
21 August 2023 
Amended claims 1-10 filed in examination 
proceedings, no basis indicated 
6 November 2023 
Examining division sends a Rule 137(4) 
communication in respect of amended claims 1-10 
filed on 21 August 2023 
16 November 2023 Amended claims 6-10 filed 
6 December 2023 
One-month period under Rule 137(4) expires 
In the above example, the applicant must, by expiry of the one-month 
period according to Rule 137(4) on 6 December 2023, indicate the basis for 
amended claims 1-5 as filed on 21 August 2023 and for amended 
claims 6-10 as filed on 16 November 2023, and failure to do so results in 
the application being deemed to be withdrawn according to Art. 94(4). It is 
not necessary for the applicant to indicate the basis for the superseded 
amendments to claims 6-10 filed on 21 August 2023. Note in particular that, 
where the basis for the amendments to claims 6-10 filed on 16 November 
2023 is not indicated by 6 December 2023, then no further Rule 137(4) 
communication is sent in respect of these amendments and the application 
is deemed to be withdrawn on expiry of the one-month period 
on 6 December 2023. 
Part H – Chapter III-4 

 
 
2.1.3 Rule 137(4) and oral proceedings 
A Rule 137(4) communication will not be sent where the amendments in 
question are filed during oral proceedings. Nonetheless, it is a requirement 
of Rule 137(4) that amendments and their basis be identified. If the 
applicant fails to fulfil this requirement in respect of amendments filed 
during oral proceedings, the amendments may, for reasons of procedural 
economy and taking into account the applicant's right to be heard in 
accordance with Art. 113(1), be rejected as inadmissible by the examining 
division, exercising its discretion under Rule 137(3). 
Amendments filed in preparation for oral proceedings in response to the 
invitation according to Rule 116(2) will be dealt with in those oral 
proceedings as indicated above. However, if the oral proceedings are 
cancelled or applicants do not attend and the procedure is continued in 
writing after the oral proceedings are held in their absence, a Rule 137(4) 
communication may be sent by the examining division in respect of those 
amendments. 
2.1.4 Transitional provisions relating to Rule 137(4) 
The procedure described in H-III, 2.1.1 to H-III, 2.1.3 applies to the 
following applications (see Art. 2(2) of the decision of the Administrative 
Council of 25 March 2009, OJ EPO 2009, 299): 
(i) 
European applications for which the search report is drawn up on or 
after 1 April 2010, 
(ii) 
Euro-PCT applications for which the supplementary European search 
report is drawn up on or after 1 April 2010, and 
(iii) 
Euro-PCT applications for which the international search report is 
drawn up by the EPO acting as International Searching Authority on 
or after 1 April 2010 (Art. 153(6); see also E-IX, 3.4). 
2.2 Amendment by submitting missing documents or by filing 
replacement pages 
The content of a European patent application or patent may be amended 
within the limits laid down in Art. 123(2) and (3). (For the conditions 
governing amendments, see also A-V, 2, H-II, H-IV, H-V and D-V, 6.) This 
will normally be done by submitting missing documents or by filing 
replacement pages. Where replacement pages are filed, the applicant or 
patent proprietor is advised, in the interests of procedural efficiency, to 
identify clearly all amendments made, and indicate on which passages of 
the original application these amendments are based. Where whole 
paragraphs have been added or deleted, it is not necessary to renumber 
the paragraphs throughout the entire application or patent. 
If handwritten amendments are filed during oral proceedings in opposition, 
the proprietor is invited in a Rule 82(2) communication to submit 
replacement paragraphs and/or claims only, and not replacement pages 
(see E-III, 8.7.3, and OJ EPO 2016, A22, points 8 to 14). 
 

Part H – Chapter III-5 
 
Amendments should preferably be identified using functions available in a 
text editor to clearly indicate deletions and insertions in the amended text. 
Pages with such indications should be submitted in addition to clean 
copies. Alternatively, handwritten form is appropriate to fulfil the 
requirements of Rule 137(4), provided that clean copies are free from 
handwritten amendments. 
The basis for amendments should preferably be indicated by including in 
the letter of reply a list of the amendments made and the precise basis for 
amendments in the application as filed (see H-III, 2.1). Where the basis is 
not explicit, e.g. where a different wording is used or features are taken 
only from drawings or generalised from a specific embodiment, it is 
advisable to give a short explanation of why Art. 123(2) is fulfilled. 
2.3 Amendments using copies 
Amendments, particularly to the description or claims, may be made by 
using copies in accordance with the following procedure: 
If deemed expedient, the examining division or formalities officer may, on a 
copy of one or more pages of the documents to be amended, put forward 
suggestions as to how amendments should be made in such a way as to 
take account of the objections raised. The annotated copies (not the 
working documents which are to remain in the dossier) will then be 
forwarded to the applicant or, in opposition proceedings, to the proprietor of 
the patent and the other parties, in the communication setting out the 
objections. In this communication, the applicant or proprietor will not only 
be informed of the deficiencies recorded and invited to adopt a position or 
submit amendments within a fixed time limit, but will also be invited 
simultaneously to resubmit the said copy and – as an alternative to 
submitting replacement pages – to indicate on this copy, separately from 
the comments of the examining division (typewritten and in such a way as 
to be well legible after photocopying), any amendments to be made to the 
pages concerned. Opponents may also be invited to submit their comments 
in the same way. 
The parties may also submit copies of one or more amended pages on 
their own initiative. The filing of completely retyped documents is normally 
objected to, for reasons of procedural economy, as these documents will 
have to be checked for correspondence with the original documents 
(see T 113/92). Requests to this effect will, therefore, normally not be 
admitted under Rule 137(3). Only where the amendments are so extensive 
as to affect the legibility of the copies, replacement pages must be filed. In 
this case such pages may also be requested by the examining division on 
its own initiative. 
2.4 Amendments made by the EPO at the request of a party 
Where necessary, deficient documents may also be amended at the 
request of a party by the competent department of the EPO. This could be 
the procedure for minor amendments, e.g. where it is necessary to insert 
details which were omitted in the request for grant, and the number of 
amendments involved is reasonable, or where whole pages or paragraphs 
are to be deleted. The party concerned is advised to submit a list 
Part H – Chapter III-6 

 
 
summarising the amendments to be undertaken by the EPO. It is, however, 
at the discretion of the examining division to decide whether the number of 
changes requested is in fact unreasonable and would take a considerable 
amount of time to deal with. If so, the examining division will require that the 
party makes the amendments and submits amended pages. This 
procedure could also be followed for minor amendments to drawings, 
e.g. for amending a reference number or deleting one or more whole 
figures (as regards the removal of references following an amendment to 
the description, see F-II, 4.8). In the case of complicated amendments to 
drawings, where it is not immediately clear how the changes are to be 
made, the party concerned, who as a rule is the applicant or proprietor, 
must submit replacement pages. 
2.5 Withdrawal of amendments/abandonment of subject matter 
Any subsequent request to withdraw an amendment is itself a request for 
further amendment; thus, if this subsequent request occurs after reply to 
the first communication from the examining division, the corresponding 
amendment will be admitted only if the examining division consents. 
In deleting subject-matter from an application, the applicant should avoid 
any statement which could be interpreted as abandonment of that 
subject-matter. Otherwise the subject-matter cannot be reinstated 
(see J 15/85, confirmed in G 1/05 and G 1/06). 
3. 
Auxiliary requests 
In examination, opposition and limitation proceedings, parties may submit a 
main request followed by one or more auxiliary requests (see also 
D-IV, 5.3). 
Example 1: 
"We request grant of a patent as per the documents originally filed or, 
alternatively, as per the amended documents now enclosed." 
Example 2: 
"We request that the opposition be rejected or, alternatively, that the patent 
be maintained in amended form as per the enclosed documents." 
Such further (auxiliary) requests are made in case the examining or 
opposition division cannot allow the main (first) request. 
If in examination proceedings applicants file text labelled as an auxiliary 
request, but also indicate that they are not yet willing to restrict themselves 
to that request, the text is not to be considered as a true auxiliary request 
within the meaning of this chapter, such that it is not possible to proceed 
directly to the issue of a communication under Rule 71(3) based on this text 
(see C-V, 1.1). In such circumstances it is appropriate to contact applicants 
by telephone to establish whether they are prepared to proceed to grant on 
the basis of that text. The applicant's agreement or non-agreement that a 
Rule 71(3) communication can be based on such an auxiliary request must 
 

Part H – Chapter III-7 
 
be mentioned in the minutes of the telephone conversation or, in the case 
of agreement, in the Rule 71(3) communication (see C-VII, 2.5). 
3.1 General principles 
If the main request is allowable, the division will ignore any auxiliary 
requests. 
If the main request is not allowable, the division will consider the auxiliary 
requests, in the sequence chosen by the requester. 
If an auxiliary request is allowable, the division will ignore all subsequent 
requests. 
3.1.1 Sequence of requests 
When a group of auxiliary requests is filed, these requests must be filed in 
a clear order and must not be worded such that they leave it for the 
examining division to identify and speculate on the intended text of the 
claims (R 14/10). Furthermore, all auxiliary requests must relate to one 
invention: the examining division will exercise its discretion under 
Rule 137(3) and will refuse to admit auxiliary requests which involve 
switching from the searched invention chosen for examination to another 
invention (see C-III, 3.5 and H-II, 6). 
Under Art. 113(2), the EPO decides upon European patent applications or 
patents only in the text submitted to it, or agreed, by applicants or 
proprietors. These parties must therefore clearly indicate the text they are 
proposing or, if they are submitting more than one text, the sequence in 
which they want the EPO to consider them. Otherwise the division does not 
know which version to base its decision on and would ultimately have to 
refuse the application, revoke the patent or reject the request for limitation 
for lack of any clear request. 
3.1.2 Obligation to give reasons 
In examination, opposition and limitation proceedings, whenever a request 
by any of the parties is refused, reasons must always be given. 
3.1.3 Neither main nor auxiliary requests allowable 
If the examining or opposition division cannot allow the main request or any 
of the auxiliary requests, it must issue a decision to that effect, taking 
Art. 113(1) and 116 into account. The decision must include the reasons for 
rejecting/refusing the main request and each of the auxiliary requests, 
except where the requests in question have been withdrawn. 
3.2 In the search phase 
In the search phase, under Rule 137(1) amendments to the claims are not 
admissible before the applicant receives the European search report, and 
therefore no auxiliary requests can be submitted. If auxiliary requests are 
submitted before the establishment of a supplementary European search 
report (see H-II, 2.1), only the main request will be taken into account in the 
search (see, however, B-VIII, 3.2.2 and B-VIII, 4.2.2). 
Part H – Chapter III-8 

 
 
3.3 In examination proceedings 
3.3.1 Indication of the amendments made in the requests and of their 
basis 
Where requests (main and/or auxiliary) are filed in examination 
proceedings and the applicant does not identify the amendments and/or 
does not indicate the basis for them in the application as filed, a 
communication according to Rule 137(4) may also be sent in respect of one 
or more of the newly filed main and/or auxiliary requests. 
For requests filed in preparation for oral proceedings, late filed requests or 
requests filed during oral proceedings, see H-III, 2.1.3. 
3.3.2 Admissibility of auxiliary requests 
3.3.2.1 Criteria for admissibility of auxiliary requests 
As a matter of principle, the examining division must, when exercising its 
discretion under Rule 137(3) not to admit one or more auxiliary requests, 
balance the interests of the applicant and procedural efficiency (see also 
H-II, 2.3, H-II, 2.5.1, H-II, 2.6 and H-II, 2.7). 
Thus, an auxiliary request which contains minor deficiencies but otherwise 
complies with the requirements of the EPC is normally admitted into the 
procedure. 
When deciding on the admissibility of auxiliary requests the principles set 
out in H-II are considered for each of the requests, since each request is in 
fact a set of amended claims. 
Auxiliary requests reintroducing subject-matter which has already been 
considered unallowable and has been removed by the applicant will not be 
admitted (see also H-II, 2.3). The same may apply to auxiliary requests 
introducing new deficiencies. 
3.3.2.2 Timeliness and structure of auxiliary requests 
If auxiliary requests are filed after the final date set in accordance with 
Rule 116(2), they are usually treated as late-filed unless a summons to oral 
proceedings was issued as the first action. 
For late-filed requests, in addition to the criteria set out in H-III, 3.3.2.1, the 
subject-matter of the new claims must not diverge considerably from the 
claims already filed. The requests normally need to represent a convergent 
development, i.e. the subject-matter of the auxiliary requests constitutes a 
sequential limitation in the direction of an intended invention and does not 
make use of different characteristics in order to branch out in different 
directions (T 1273/04). In particular, the applicant cannot shift to the 
examining division the responsibility for defining the subject-matter of the 
application by filing a large number of unstructured requests or requests 
involving different variants: this leads to the requests not being admitted. 
 

Part H – Chapter III-9 
 
3.3.3 Preparing the decision 
If the examining division is able to allow an auxiliary request (but not the 
main request or any higher-ranking auxiliary requests), it will inform the 
applicant accordingly in a communication under Rule 71(2) or in an annex 
to the communication according to Rule 71(3), giving a brief indication of 
the essential reasons for refusing the main and higher-ranking auxiliary 
requests (see C-V, 1.1). 
Where an auxiliary request appears to comprise subject-matter that offers a 
good starting point for an allowable request, but it is considered expedient 
to issue a communication under Art. 94(3), a brief indication is given of the 
essential reasons for the non-allowability or non-admissibility of the subject-
matter of the higher-ranking requests, and a suggestion is provided as to 
the most promising request (see C-III, 4.1.2). 
Care needs to be taken where oral proceedings have been specifically 
requested in cases where the examining division has not allowed the main 
request: the applicant must be summoned to oral proceedings even if the 
examining division considers one of the auxiliary requests to be patentable. 
In such cases it may be appropriate to ask applicants in a telephone call 
whether, in view of the examining division's intention to issue a 
communication under Rule 71(3) for the allowable auxiliary request, they 
would be prepared either to withdraw the request for oral proceedings for 
the main request or to replace the main request with the allowable auxiliary 
request. 
During oral proceedings, the division addresses the main request and 
decides on the admissibility of the auxiliary requests, if any, filed in reply to 
the summons to oral proceedings (see H-II, 2.3 and H-III, 2.1.3). Moreover, 
it may be appropriate to ask applicants whether, in view of an allowable 
request, they would be prepared to withdraw the unallowable higher-
ranking request(s). However, the applicant is not obliged to do so. 
The summons to oral proceedings must indicate the essential reasons that 
led the examining division not to allow or not to admit the auxiliary requests 
already filed so that the applicant is not taken by surprise by the refusal of 
the application in case the applicant decides not to attend the oral 
proceedings (C-V, 1.1 and C-V, 4.9). This applies regardless of whether 
oral proceedings are held in the absence of the applicant or are cancelled. 
In deciding on the admissibility of the auxiliary requests, the examining 
division will apply the criteria set out in: 
(i) 
H-III, 3.3.2.1 if auxiliary requests are submitted by the date set 
according to Rule 116(1); 
(ii) 
H-III, 3.3.2.1 and H-III, 3.3.2.2 if auxiliary requests are submitted after 
the date set according to Rule 116(1). 
The examining division may then exercise its discretion under Rule 137(3) 
not to admit one or more of the requests (see H-II, 2.3, H-II, 2.7, H-II, 2.7.1 
and 
H-III, 3.3.1), 
and 
it 
may 
do 
so 
in 
the 
absence 
of 
the 
Part H – Chapter III-10 

 
 
applicant/representative. A decision to refuse the application in these 
circumstances must not take the applicant by surprise (E-III, 8.3.3.1 and 
E-III, 8.3.3.3). 
3.3.4 Complete text for auxiliary request not yet available 
If a complete text corresponding to the allowable auxiliary request does not 
yet exist, the applicant must be asked to make the necessary amendments. 
In oral proceedings, the division does always try to have the description 
brought into line with the version of the claims it considers allowable. If 
necessary, the oral proceedings are interrupted for this purpose. 
3.3.5 Complete text for auxiliary request available 
If a complete text of the application according to the allowable auxiliary 
request already exists, a communication under Rule 71(3) is issued. In an 
annex to this communication the division must give a brief indication of the 
reasons on which the refusal of the higher-ranking requests is based (see 
also C-V, 1.1). Where appropriate, this may be done by reference to earlier 
communications. If applicants approve this proposed text, then in 
accordance with Rule 71(3) they indicate this by filing the translations of the 
claims and paying the fees for grant and publishing without filing any 
request for amendment or correction of the proposed text (if such a request 
is filed, the procedure is as indicated in C-V, 4). If they do so, the 
application proceeds to grant on the basis of the text of the auxiliary 
request as proposed in the communication under Rule 71(3) (see C-V, 2). 
3.3.6 Applicant does not approve the text proposed for grant 
If the applicant does not approve the text according to the auxiliary request 
as proposed in the communication under Rule 71(3), the procedure is as 
set out in C-V, 4 (see in particular C-V, 4.7 and C-V, 4.6.2). 
3.4 In opposition proceedings 
In opposition proceedings, if an auxiliary request by the proprietor for 
maintenance of the patent in amended form is allowable, the division 
cannot revoke the patent (see T 234/86). 
3.4.1 Written procedure 
If the opposition division, after examining the parties' submissions, 
considers it can maintain the patent only in amended form as per an 
auxiliary request from the proprietor, it must first ensure that the parties 
have been allowed to comment under Art. 113(1) on the grounds and 
evidence behind the non-allowance of the higher-ranking request(s) and on 
the grounds and evidence behind the allowance of the lower-ranking 
request (where oral proceedings have been requested, see also 
H-III, 3.5.2). 
If, despite the existence of an allowable request, the proprietor continues to 
maintain one or more unallowable higher-ranking requests, an interlocutory 
decision is issued. This decision must include the finding that the patent 
and the invention to which it relates, as amended in accordance with the 
allowable auxiliary request, meet the requirements of the EPC. It must also 
set out the reasons, based on grounds and evidence already 
 

Part H – Chapter III-11 
 
communicated to the parties, for refusing the higher-ranking requests and 
for allowing the lower-ranking request. 
3.4.2 Oral proceedings 
If the opposition division is able to allow an auxiliary request but not the 
main or higher-ranking auxiliary requests, the chair informs the parties 
(possibly after interrupting the proceedings) which request is allowable and 
that the higher-ranking request(s) is/are not allowable (and on which 
grounds they are not allowable), ensuring beforehand that the parties have 
already had the opportunity to comment on all grounds and evidence 
underlying this finding. The chair will then normally ask proprietors if they 
are prepared to convert the allowable auxiliary request into a main request 
(by abandoning all higher-ranking unallowable requests). The division 
cannot, however, insist on the proprietor making such a declaration. 
If, despite the existence of an allowable auxiliary request, the proprietor 
continues to maintain higher-ranking unallowable requests, the division 
issues an interlocutory decision to the effect that: 
(a) 
the main request and possibly one or more auxiliary requests is/are 
not allowable 
(b) 
in respect of the allowable auxiliary request, the amended patent and 
the invention to which it relates satisfy the requirements of the EPC. 
If, on the other hand, the proprietor withdraws the higher-ranking requests 
such that the allowable auxiliary request becomes the main request, the 
division will issue an interlocutory decision to the effect that this request 
satisfies the EPC. 
The division tries as far as possible to ensure that, if it allows an auxiliary 
request at oral proceedings, the complete final text is available at the end of 
the proceedings. 
3.5 In limitation proceedings 
3.5.1 General principles 
The filing of auxiliary requests (e.g. claim versions) together with a main 
request is possible in limitation proceedings, just as in examination 
proceedings. However, there are restrictions with regard to the possibility of 
filing amendments in limitation proceedings (see D-X, 4.3 and D-X, 4.5). 
The procedure to be applied, subject to any request for oral proceedings, is 
slightly different to that applicable in pre-grant proceedings under 
Rule 71(3), especially in view of the requirements of Art. 113(1) and (2). In 
particular, in a case where an auxiliary request is allowable and the main 
request is not, if this were communicated under Rule 95(3), this would no 
longer leave the requester the option of having the main request rejected 
with an appealable decision. Thus, the following applies: 
(a) 
if the main request is allowable, the invitation under Rule 95(3) to file 
the translations and pay the fees will be issued on that basis; 
Part H – Chapter III-12 

 
 
(b) 
if an auxiliary request is allowable, but not the main request (and 
possibly other higher-ranking requests), proprietors will be informed 
of the reasons in a communication under Rule 95(2) and invited to 
abandon the non-allowable request(s); if they do not do so, the 
request will be rejected as in (c) below; 
(c) 
if none of the requests is allowable, initially a communication under 
Rule 95(2) setting out the reasons and indicating a possible remedy 
is sent to the requester; if no remedy is undertaken, a decision 
rejecting the request is issued, and the annex prepared by the 
examining division will need to set out the reasons why none of the 
requests are allowable. 
In cases (b) and (c), the decision may be appealed by the requester. 
3.5.2 Written procedure 
If the examining division, after examining the request for limitation, 
considers that the patent can be limited only on the basis of an auxiliary 
request, it informs the requester accordingly in a communication under 
Rule 95(2), giving reasons why the main request and any higher-ranking 
auxiliary requests are not allowable and informing the requester which 
auxiliary request is considered allowable. Where appropriate, the division 
also informs the requester what amendments must be made to the patent 
specification documents to bring them into line (Art. 105b(1) and 
Rule 95(2)). 
If in response to the communication under Rule 95(2) the requester 
withdraws the unallowable request(s) and (where applicable) makes any 
amendments still outstanding, the examining division will issue a 
communication under Rule 95(3) inviting him to pay the prescribed fee and 
to file the translation of the limited claims of the allowable request 
(see D-X, 5). 
If the requesters insist on maintaining an unallowable request, and fail to 
comply with the examining division's request that they file documents 
corresponding to the allowable auxiliary request, the request for limitation 
must be rejected (Art. 105b(2) and Rule 95(4)). The decision must give the 
reasons for not allowing the higher-ranking request(s) and must point out, 
as regards the allowable auxiliary request, that the requester failed to 
comply with the division's request to submit a text enabling the patent to be 
limited on the basis of the allowable request. 
3.5.3 Oral proceedings 
If the examining division is able to allow an auxiliary request but not the 
main or higher-ranking requests, the chair informs the requesters (possibly 
after interrupting the proceedings) which request is allowable and why the 
higher-ranking request(s) is/are not. The requesters will then normally be 
asked if they are prepared to convert the allowable auxiliary request into a 
main request. The division cannot however insist on the requester making 
such a declaration. 
 

Part H – Chapter III-13 
 
If, despite the existence of an allowable text, the requester continues to 
maintain an unallowable higher-ranking request, the request for limitation 
shall be rejected (Rule 95(4)). The division will issue a decision giving the 
reasons for not allowing the higher-preference requests and pointing out 
that, as regards the allowable auxiliary request, the requester failed to 
comply with its request to submit a text enabling the patent to be limited on 
the basis of the allowable request. 
4. Different texts in respect of different contracting states 
In the cases discussed in H-III, 4.2 to H-III, 4.4, an application or a patent 
may contain a different set of claims (and descriptions) for different 
contracting states (also see G-IV, 6). For examination and opposition 
proceedings, see H-III, 4.1 to H-III, 4.4; for limitation proceedings, see 
D-X, 10. 
It is not possible to have different text in respect of extension or validation 
states, as the relevant provisions allowing an exception to the principle of 
unity of the European patent application/patent relate only to EPC 
contracting states. However, where there are different text versions for the 
contracting states, the applicant may determine which one applies to the 
respective extension/validation state. 
4.1 Dealing with different texts in examination 
If the examining or opposition division considers that the description and 
drawings are so inconsistent with any set of claims as to create confusion, 
it will require the applicant or proprietor to amend the description and 
drawings to remedy this. If the applicant or proprietor voluntarily proposes 
such an amendment the examining or opposition division will admit it only if 
it considers this necessary. In particular, different descriptions and 
drawings will be required only if it is not possible to set out clearly in a 
common description which subject-matter is to be protected in the different 
contracting states. For adaptation of the description in the case of national 
rights of earlier date, see H-III, 4.4. 
Hence this type of application or patent will, after amendment, either 
consist of two or more distinct sets of claims each supported by the same 
description and drawings, or two or more sets of claims each supported by 
different descriptions and drawings. 
For the application of Rules 80 and 138 in opposition proceedings, 
see H-III, 4.2, H-III, 4.4 and H-III, 4.5. 
4.2 Different text in respect of the state of the art according to 
Art. 54(3) EPC and Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 
If the EPO notes that in respect of one or more of the designated 
contracting states the content of an earlier European patent application 
forms part of the state of the art pursuant to Art. 54(3), two situations can 
arise: 
(i) 
the application under examination was pending at the date of entry 
into force of the EPC 2000 (13 December 2007), or the patent under 
examination had already been granted at that date. Art. 54(4) 
Part H – Chapter III-14 

 
 
EPC 1973 is still transitionally applicable (see Art. 1 of the decision of 
the Administrative Council of 28 June 2001, OJ EPO 2003 Special 
edition No. 1, 202), with Rule 23a EPC 1973 and the first part of 
Rule 87 EPC 1973 as implementing regulations thereto. Here, if 
conflicting prior art gives rise to different texts of the claims for 
different contracting states and if the relevant designation fee(s) for 
the earlier European patent application has/have been paid, different 
sets of claims for the contracting states concerned may be filed, if 
required to establish novelty over that prior art. In opposition 
proceedings, Rule 80 also applies to amendments occasioned by the 
state of the art according to Art. 54(4) EPC 1973. 
(ii) 
the application or patent under examination is not one of those 
covered under (i). As Art. 54(4) EPC 1973 has been deleted, the 
conflicting prior art belongs to the state of the art for all contracting 
states, irrespective of the effected designations (see also F-II, 4.3). 
Likewise, it is irrelevant if the designation fee(s) for the earlier 
European patent application has/have been paid, since there is no 
provision in the EPC 2000 corresponding to Rule 23a EPC 1973. 
Consequently, the possibility of having different texts for different 
contracting states on the basis of Art. 54(3) no longer exists. 
4.3 Different text where a transfer of right takes place pursuant to 
Art. 61 or Rule 78 in respect of certain designated states 
4.3.1 Different text where a transfer of right takes place pursuant to 
Art. 61 in examination proceedings 
If by a final decision pursuant to Art. 61 it is adjudged that a third party is 
entitled to the grant of a European patent, the original European patent 
application must contain, "where appropriate", for the designated 
contracting states in which the decision was taken or recognised or must be 
recognised on the basis of the Protocol on Recognition, claims, a 
description and drawings which are different from those for the other 
designated contracting states (see also H-III, 4.1 and C-IX, 2). 
4.3.2 Different texts where a transfer of the patent in respect of 
certain designated states takes place in opposition proceedings 
Where a third party has, in accordance with Art. 99(4), replaced the 
previous proprietor for one or some of the designated contracting states 
(see D-I, 6, third paragraph), the patent as maintained in opposition 
proceedings may for those states contain claims, a description and 
drawings which are different from those for the other designated contracting 
states (see also D-VII, 3.2). However, Rule 80 applies to amendments by 
each of the proprietors. 
4.3.3 Opposition cases with different texts where a transfer of rights 
by virtue of a final decision pursuant to Art. 61 takes place in 
examination proceedings 
The substance of H-III, 4.3.2 applies mutatis mutandis (see also D-I, 6, 
third paragraph and D-VII, 3.2). 
Art. 61(1)(b) 
Rule 17 
Rule 18(1) and (2) 
Rule 78(2) 
 

Part H – Chapter III-15 
 
4.4 Different texts where national rights of earlier date exist 
National rights of earlier date are not comprised in the state of the art 
(Art. 54) for the purposes of the EPO examination for patentability. 
However, under Art. 139(2), national rights of earlier date can be invoked, 
after the grant of the European patent, in national proceedings as a ground 
for revocation. These rights represent exceptions to the uniformity of 
European substantive patent law. Where national rights exist, therefore, the 
applicant or proprietor has a legitimate interest in submitting different claims 
to ensure that the patent granted will not be partly revoked in some 
contracting states (see Rule 80 and Rule 138). The filing of different claims 
is, however, neither required nor suggested. 
If an applicant or proprietor produces evidence in examination/opposition 
proceedings of the existence of pertinent national rights of earlier date in a 
particular (designated) contracting state, it is appropriate to admit separate 
claims for the contracting state in question. The evidence must be in the 
form of a specification or, where applicable, a copy of the utility model or 
utility certificate or of the application for it (see Art. 140); this is necessary to 
prevent unjustified deviation from the unity of the European patent. 
In opposition proceedings, a national right of earlier date is neither a ground 
for opposition nor a ground for revocation. Hence, it is not admissible for an 
opponent to introduce a national right of earlier date into opposition 
proceedings to support a novelty attack. 
The effect of the national right of earlier date is determined by the relevant 
national provisions. The examining or opposition division does not decide 
whether the applicant or proprietor has limited the scope of the 
application/patent to the extent required to overcome the effect of the 
national right (see G-IV, 6). That is the responsibility of the applicant or 
proprietor. 
The examining or opposition division must check that the separate claims 
do not contravene Art. 123(2) and Art. 123(3), and that they meet the other 
requirements of the EPC. The same applies to a separate description 
(see H-III, 4.1). 
Moreover, in general, there is no justification for a separate description. 
However, at a suitable point in the preamble to the description, preferably in 
a separate paragraph following the information pursuant to Rule 42(1)(a), a 
reference to this situation must be made, for example along the following 
lines: 
"With reference to ... (e.g. earlier application No. ... in ...), the applicant has 
voluntarily limited the scope of the application /patent for... (contracting 
state) by submitting separate claims for this (these) state(s)." 
4.5 Opposition proceedings where the claims as granted are 
different for different contracting states 
Where a patent has been granted with different sets of claims for the 
reasons set out in H-III, 4.2 to H-III, 4.4, the proprietor might wish to bring 
the claims into line either by applying a limitation already introduced for one 
Art. 139(2) 
Part H – Chapter III-16 

 
 
or more contracting states to the other contracting states or by filing a new 
single set of claims for all contracting states. 
In such a case, the amendments to each different set of claims as granted 
must separately fulfil the requirements of Rule 80 and Art. 123(3) (and 
Rule 138, if applicable). 
5. 
Calculation of claims fees 
The claims fees are calculated in accordance with A-X, 11.2, C-V, 1.4, 
C-V, 4.2 and C-V, 4.8.1. 
 

Part H – Chapter IV-1 
 
Chapter IV – Allowability of amendments 
1. Introduction 
Chapters H-II and H-III deal with the admissibility of amendments, i.e. 
whether the competent department of the EPO will admit amended 
application documents or an amended patent specification into the 
procedure. After an amendment has been admitted into the procedure, the 
competent department must then decide whether the amendment is 
allowable, i.e. whether it satisfies the requirements of the EPC. It is 
important to note that an admissible amendment is not automatically 
allowable. 
2. Allowability of amendments under Art. 123(2) 
2.1 Basic principle 
The question of allowability of amendments is legally a question of whether 
the application as so amended is allowable. An amended application must 
of course satisfy all the requirements of the EPC including, in particular, 
inventive step and the other matters listed in B-XI, 3.6 (see also C-III, 2). 
If, however, the applicant seeks to amend the description (other than 
references to the prior art, see H-IV, 2.2.7), the drawings or the claims in 
such a way that subject-matter which extends beyond the content of the 
application as filed is thereby introduced, the application as so amended 
cannot be allowed. 
The underlying idea of Art. 123(2) is that applicants are not allowed to 
improve their position by adding subject-matter not disclosed in the 
application as filed, which would give him an unwarranted advantage and 
could be damaging to the legal security of third parties relying on the 
content of the original application (see G 1/93). 
An amendment is regarded as introducing subject-matter which extends 
beyond the content of the application as filed, and therefore unallowable, if 
the overall change in the content of the application (whether by way of 
addition, alteration or excision) results in the skilled person being presented 
with information which is not directly and unambiguously derivable from that 
previously presented by the application, even when account is taken of 
matter which is implicit to a person skilled in the art (see G 2/10). 
2.2 Content of the application as "originally" filed – general rules 
Under Art. 123(2), it is impermissible to add to a European application 
subject-matter which the skilled person cannot derive directly and 
unambiguously, using common general knowledge and also taking into 
account any features implicit to a person skilled in the art in what is 
expressly mentioned in the document, from the disclosure of the application 
as filed. Literal support is, however, not required by the wording of 
Art. 123(2) (see T 667/08). 
The term "implicit disclosure" means no more than the clear and 
unambiguous consequence of what is explicitly mentioned in the 
application as filed. Thus, the common general knowledge must be taken 
Part H – Chapter IV-2 

 
 
into account in deciding what is clearly and unambiguously implied by the 
explicit disclosure of a document. However, the question of what may be 
rendered obvious by that disclosure in the light of common general 
knowledge is not relevant to the assessment of what is implicitly disclosed 
by that document (T 823/96, T 1125/07). 
When assessing the conformity of the amended claims with the 
requirements of Art. 123(2), the focus is placed on what is really disclosed 
to the skilled person by the documents as filed as directed to a technical 
audience. 
In 
particular, the 
examining 
division 
needs 
to 
avoid 
disproportionally focusing on the structure of the claims as filed to the 
detriment of the subject-matter that the skilled person would directly and 
unambiguously derive from the application as a whole. 
Furthermore, the assessment of the requirements of Art. 123(2) is made 
from the standpoint of the skilled person on a technical and reasonable 
basis, avoiding artificial and semantic constructions (T 99/13). 
2.2.1 Features described in a document cross-referenced in the 
description 
Features which are not disclosed in the description of the invention as 
originally filed but which are only described in a cross-referenced document 
which is identified in such description are prima facie not within "the content 
of the application as filed" for the purpose of Art. 123(2). It is only under 
particular conditions that such features can be introduced by way of 
amendment into the claims of an application. 
Such an amendment would not contravene Art. 123(2) if the description of 
the invention as originally filed leaves no doubt to a skilled reader 
(see T 689/90) that: 
(i) 
protection is or may be sought for such features; 
(ii) 
such features contribute to solving the technical problem underlying 
the invention; 
(iii) 
such features at least implicitly clearly belong to the description of the 
invention contained in the application as filed (Art. 78(1)(b)) and thus 
to the content of the application as filed (Art. 123(2)); and 
(iv) 
such features are precisely defined and identifiable within the 
disclosure of the reference document. 
Moreover, documents not available to the public on the date of filing of the 
application can only be considered if (see T 737/90): 
(a) 
a copy of the document was available to the EPO, or to the receiving 
Office if the application is a Euro-PCT application which was not filed 
at the EPO as the receiving Office, on or before the date of filing of 
the application; and 
 

Part H – Chapter IV-3 
 
(b) 
the document was made available to the public no later than on the 
date of publication of the application under Art. 93 (e.g. by being 
present in the application dossier and therefore made public under 
Art. 128(4)). 
2.2.2 Missing parts of the description or missing drawings filed 
under Rule 56 after the date of filing 
Rule 56 allows the applicant to file missing drawings or parts of the 
description subsequently, and to rely on the priority document in order to 
avoid redating of the application to the date of filing of the missing parts. 
Under Rule 56(3), redating is only avoided where the missing parts were 
"completely contained" in the priority document (see C-III, 1 and A-II, 5). 
Rule 56(3) applies only at the filing stage of the application. At later stages 
of the procedure it is not permissible to rely on the priority documents to 
correct or amend the application as filed (in keeping with G 3/89 and 
G 11/91). For Euro-PCT applications a similar provision exists under 
Rule 20.6 PCT, whereby a review by the EPO as elected or designated 
Office is possible under Rule 82ter PCT. 
Missing parts of the description and/or missing drawings allowed under 
Rule 56(3) are always considered to be part of the application documents 
"as originally filed". 
2.2.3 Erroneously filed application documents or parts under 
Rule 56a 
Rule 56a allows the applicant to file correct application documents or parts 
if wrong application documents or parts have been filed erroneously. Under 
Rule 56a(4) the applicant can rely on the priority document to avoid 
redating the application to the date of filing of the correct application 
documents or parts. 
If applicants realise on the filing date (or earlier if the filing date cannot yet 
be accorded) that they erroneously filed incorrect application documents, 
they can file correct application documents under Rule 56a(2) on or before 
the filing date, without changing the filing date (A-II, 6.6). 
If correct application documents or parts are filed later than the date of 
filing, under Rule 56a(4), redating is avoided if the correct documents or 
parts were "completely contained" in the priority document (see C-III, 1 and 
A-II, 6). 
Rule 56a(4) applies only at the filing stage of the application. It is not 
permissible to rely on the priority documents to correct or amend the 
application as filed at later stages of the procedure (in keeping with G 3/89 
and G 11/91). For Euro-PCT applications a similar provision exists under 
Rule 20.5bis(d) PCT and Rule 20.6 PCT, whereby a review by the EPO as 
elected or designated Office is possible under Rule 82ter PCT. 
Correct application documents or parts allowed under Rule 56a(2) and 
Rule 56a(4) are always considered to be part of the application documents 
"as originally filed" (see A-II, 6.3 and A-II, 6.4). If erroneously filed 
Rule 56 
Rule 56a 
Part H – Chapter IV-4 

 
 
application documents or parts remain in the application under Rule 56a(4), 
they are part of the application as filed (Art. 123(2)). 
2.2.4 Claims filed after the date of filing 
Claims filed after the date of filing under Rule 58 are never considered to 
be part of the application documents "as originally filed" and must therefore 
comply with the requirements of Art. 123(2) (see A-III, 15). For this reason, 
the examining division has to check that the claims satisfy the requirements 
of Art. 123(2), according to the same practice and standards as established 
in examination for amendments filed in other phases of the procedure 
(see H-V). 
2.2.5 Sequence listings filed after the date of filing 
A standardised sequence listing filed after the date of filing does not form 
part of the description (Rule 30(2)). Such a standardised sequence listing is 
not published either as an annex to the application or together with the 
specification (see the notice from the EPO dated 9 December 2021, 
OJ EPO 2021, A97, point 15). 
Pages and electronic files disclosing sequences or constituting a non-
standardised sequence listing which were filed at the date of filing are an 
integral part of the application as originally filed and are treated like any 
other parts of the description. 
A subsequently filed standardised sequence listing may contain only the 
sequence information – in a standardised form – already contained in the 
original application, and in particular the number of sequences and their 
numbering needs to be the same as in the original description (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A97). To this 
end the applicant must file a statement confirming that the subsequently 
filed standardised sequence listing does not include matter which goes 
beyond the content of the application as originally filed (Art. 2(2) of the 
decision of the President dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A96). In 
line with this, a subsequently filed standardised sequence listing cannot be 
used to determine the originally disclosed content of the application, but 
only for search purposes (see the notice from the EPO dated 9 December 
2021, OJ EPO 2021, A97). 
A subsequently filed standardised sequence listing is not to be examined 
for compliance with the requirements of Art. 123(2), as it is not part of the 
description. 
Without prejudice to Rule 30, a sequence listing forming part of the 
description may be corrected or amended in accordance with Rule 139 
and/or Art. 123(2). In this case a complete new sequence listing in TXT 
format containing the corrections or amendments is to be filed (see the 
notice from the EPO dated 9 December 2021, OJ EPO 2021, A97, 
point 10). 
2.2.6 Priority documents 
Under Art. 123(2) it is impermissible to add to a European application 
matter present only in the priority document for that application 
Rule 58 
 

Part H – Chapter IV-5 
 
(see T 260/85) unless this is done under the provisions of Rule 56(3) (H-IV, 
2.2.2) or Rule 56a(4) (H-IV, 2.2.3). For correction of errors, see H-VI, 4. 
2.2.7 Citation of prior art in the description after the filing date 
There is normally no objection to an applicant introducing, by amendment, 
further information regarding prior art which is relevant; indeed this may be 
required by the examining division (see F-II, 4.3 and F-III, 8). 
2.2.8 Clarifications 
The removal of a lack of clarity will normally not be objected to, provided 
that the change does not extend beyond the disclosure of the application as 
originally filed (Art. 123(2)). 
2.2.9 Trade marks 
If an amendment is made in order to clarify the meaning of a trade mark or 
to replace a registered trade mark with a corresponding technical term, the 
examining division needs to be particularly careful to ascertain that the 
amendment does not conflict with Art. 123(2). The composition of a trade-
marked product may have changed over time. 
2.3 Content of the application as "originally" filed – special 
applications 
2.3.1 Applications filed by reference to an earlier application 
According to Rule 40(1)(c), the applicant may file a European application by 
reference to a previously filed application (A-II, 4.1.3.1). Since claims are 
no longer required in order for a date of filing to be accorded, the applicant 
has three options: 
(i) 
when filing the European application, indicate that the reference to 
the previously filed application includes the claims 
(ii) 
at the time of filing, file a new set of claims together with an indication 
that the description and any drawings are filed by reference to a 
previously filed application 
(iii) 
when filing the European application, indicate the reference to a 
previously filed application and file the claims after the date of filing 
(Rule 58). 
In cases (i) and (ii) the claims will form part of the application as originally 
filed, whereas in case (iii) the claims filed after the date of filing will not and 
will thus have to fulfil the requirements of Art. 123(2) (see H-IV, 2.2.4). 
2.3.2 Divisional applications 
Under Art. 76(1), the subject-matter of a divisional application may not 
extend beyond the content of the parent application as originally filed. 
Furthermore, amendments made to the divisional application subsequent to 
its filing may not extend beyond the content of the divisional application as 
originally filed (Art. 123(2); for more details see C-IX, 1.4). 
Art. 123(2) 
Part H – Chapter IV-6 

 
 
2.3.3 Applications resulting from a decision under Art. 61 
If, as a result of a final decision, it is adjudged that a person other than the 
applicant is entitled to the grant of a patent, that person may file a new 
European patent application under Art. 61(1)(b). In this case, the provisions 
of Art. 76(1) apply mutatis mutandis to the new application filed under 
Art. 61(1)(b). 
This means that the new application must not contain any subject-matter 
extending beyond the content of the earlier (unentitled) application as 
originally filed. Furthermore, Art. 123(2) means that this new application 
may not be amended in such a way as to extend its subject-matter beyond 
its content as originally filed, even where the subject-matter in question is 
contained in the earlier application (for more details see C-IX, 2.1). 
2.3.4 International applications 
For the purposes of Art. 123(2), the documents as originally filed are those 
originally filed in the PCT phase (normally published as a WO publication), 
a copy of which can always be obtained from the International Bureau. 
Therefore amendments made during the PCT phase (including amended, 
substitute or rectified sheets, even if attached to the WO publication) or 
upon entry into the regional phase before the EPO must, if maintained in 
the European phase, fulfil the requirements of Art. 123(2), and all such 
amendments must be carefully considered. 
3. 
Allowability of amendments under Art. 123(3) 
3.1 Basic principles 
The European patent as granted or as amended in opposition, limitation or 
revocation proceedings determines retroactively the protection conferred by 
the European patent application. 
Opposition proceedings will frequently give rise to amendments to the 
claims, following from grounds for opposition raised under Art. 100. 
Reasoned requests filed independently by proprietors of the patent for an 
amendment to the claims, e.g. for limitation of the patent in view of an 
aspect of the state of the art which has come to their knowledge, may also 
result in amendments to the claims after examination by the opposition 
division. 
In such cases the claims of the European patent may not be amended in 
such a way as to extend the protection conferred by the patent. 
Art. 123(3) is directly aimed at protecting the interests of third parties by 
prohibiting any broadening of the claims of a granted patent, even if there is 
a basis for such broadening in the application as filed (see G 1/93, 
Reasons 9). 
3.2 Protection conferred by the patent as granted 
The extent of protection conferred by a European patent is determined by 
the claims. Nevertheless, the description and drawings are to be used to 
interpret the claims. 
Art. 69(2) 
Art. 123(3) 
Art. 69(1) 
 

Part H – Chapter IV-7 
 
The Protocol on the Interpretation of Art. 69, which is, pursuant to 
Art. 164(1), an integral part of the EPC, specifies how Art. 69 is to be 
interpreted. 
Since, pursuant to Art. 69(1), amendments to the description and drawings 
will also influence the interpretation of the claims, and may therefore extend 
the protection conferred, any such amendments extending protection in this 
way are not allowable (see G 1/93). 
3.3 Version of the granted patent to be considered 
In order to verify the criteria of Art. 123(3) the examining or opposition 
division needs to compare the text of the amended claims with the claims of 
the patent as granted or as amended in opposition or earlier limitation 
proceedings, whichever claims are the most recent in force. 
3.4 Assessment of impermissible extension of the protection 
conferred 
In view of the above considerations, all amendments made to claims and 
any connected amendments to the description and drawings in the course 
of opposition proceedings, such as a change in the technical features of the 
invention, must be examined to determine whether such amendments 
could result in the extension of the subject-matter beyond the content of the 
application as originally filed (Art. 123(2)) or in the extension of the 
protection conferred (Art. 123(3)). 
If, in view of Art. 84, the application documents have been adapted to 
amended claims before grant, thereby deleting part of the subject-matter 
originally disclosed in order to avoid inconsistencies in the patent 
specification, as a rule, subject-matter deleted for this reason cannot be 
reinserted either into the patent specification or into the claims as granted 
without 
infringing 
Art. 123(3). 
An 
analogous 
finding 
applies 
to 
subject-matter retained in the patent specification during such adaptation 
for reasons of comprehensibility, but indicated as not relating to the claimed 
invention. 
The requirements of Art. 123(2) and Art. 123(3) have to be dealt with 
separately: 
(a) 
Examination for compliance with Art. 123(2) is conducted in the same 
way as in examination proceedings. 
(b) 
Examination for compliance with Art. 123(3), on the other hand, is 
based on the claims as granted, or as amended in opposition or 
earlier limitation proceedings, where necessary using the description 
and drawings to interpret the claims (Art. 69 and the Protocol on the 
Interpretation of Art. 69). 
A composition which is specified in a claim as comprising a component in 
an amount which is defined by a numerical range of values is subject to an 
implicit proviso excluding the presence of that component in an amount 
outside of that range. An amendment restricting the breadth of that 
component, for instance by narrowing down a generic class or a list of 
Part H – Chapter IV-8 

 
 
chemical compounds defining that component, has the consequence of 
limiting the scope of this implicit proviso. However, a composition which is 
defined as comprising the components indicated in the claim is open to the 
presence of any further components unless otherwise specified. Therefore 
in a claim directed to such an openly defined composition, the restriction of 
the breadth of a component present therein may have the effect of 
broadening the scope of protection of that claim, with the consequence that 
in opposition/appeal proceedings such amended claim may extend the 
protection conferred by the granted patent (Art. 123(3)) (see T 2017/07 and 
T 287/11). Restricting the breadth of the component means that certain 
materials are no longer explicitly limited by the claim and therefore can be 
present in amounts which were excluded from the granted claim. 
3.5 Conflicts between Art. 123(2) and Art. 123(3) 
A possible conflict between the requirements of Art. 123(2) and (3) may 
occur where, in the procedure before grant, a feature was added to the 
application which is considered unallowable under Art. 123(2) in opposition 
proceedings. In that case, Art. 123(2) would require deletion of such a 
feature whereas Art. 123(3) would not allow deletion, as this would extend 
the protection conferred by the patent as granted. In such a case the patent 
will have to be revoked under Art. 100(c). However, where this feature can 
be replaced by a feature for which there is a basis in the application as 
filed and which does not extend the protection conferred by the patent as 
granted, maintenance in this amended form can be allowed. If the added 
feature, 
without 
providing 
a 
technical 
contribution 
to 
the 
subject-matter of the claimed invention, merely limits the protection 
conferred by the patent as granted by excluding protection for part of the 
subject-matter of the claimed invention as covered by the application as 
filed, this feature may be maintained (see G 1/93). The technical 
significance of a feature in a claim is governed by its contribution to the 
technical definition of the claimed subject-matter, and that contribution is to 
be assessed by the skilled person in the light of the original disclosure 
(see T 518/99). 
3.6 Conflicts between Art. 123(3) and other requirements of the EPC 
Other requirements of the EPC may also interact with Art. 123(3) after 
grant. For instance, if a patent as granted only contains claims that in fact 
define a "method for treatment of the human or animal body by therapy or 
surgery practised on the human or animal body" or contain such a method 
step, and such a patent is opposed under Art. 53(c), then Art. 53(c) and 
123(3) may operate in combination so that the patent must inevitably be 
revoked, in that: 
– 
the patent cannot be maintained as granted because its claims 
define subject-matter which is excluded from patentability under 
Art. 53(c); and 
– 
the patent cannot be maintained in amended form because 
amendment of the claims as granted by deletion of such "method 
features" would be contrary to Art. 123(3) (see T 82/93). 
Art. 123(3) 
 

Part H – Chapter IV-9 
 
4. Amendments relating to unsearched matter 
4.1 Rule 137(5) 
Rule 137(5) relates to a matter of substantive law rather than to procedural 
law. It sets out two further conditions for the allowability of amended claims, 
namely they may not relate to (i) unsearched subject-matter which does not 
combine with the originally claimed invention or group of inventions to form 
a single general inventive concept and (ii) subject-matter not searched in 
accordance with Rule 62a and Rule 63 (see, however, H-II, 5). 
Thus Rule 137(5), as opposed to Rule 137(3), does not provide a legal 
basis for the exercise of discretion by the division not to admit amended 
claims. The examination of the compliance of amended claims with 
Rule 137(5) therefore requires an in-depth assessment, not just a 
prima facie analysis.  
4.1.1 Rule 62a and/or Rule 63 cases 
Amended claims may not relate to subject-matter not searched in 
accordance 
with 
Rule 62a 
or 
Rule 63 
(see, 
however, 
H-II, 5). 
Consequently, the presence of this subject-matter in the description cannot 
be used as a basis for its reintroduction into the claims (see also 
B-VIII, 3.2.2 and B-VIII, 4.2.2).  
However, the examining division does not raise an objection under 
Rule 137(5), second sentence, if the applicant only further limits a searched 
claim by introducing subject-matter taken from the description unless this 
subject-matter was explicitly declared as not searched under Rule 62a 
and/or Rule 63. 
When assessing the allowability of an amendment under Rule 137(5), 
second sentence, the examining division also evaluates if the limitation of 
the search under Rule 62a and/or Rule 63 or the declaration of no search 
was justified (see B-VIII, 3.2.2, B-VIII, 4.2.2, H-II, 5). If the invitation was not 
appropriate or the limitation not justified, an additional search may be 
necessary (see C-IV, 7.3). 
4.1.2 Subject-matter taken from the description 
Within the framework of Art. 123(2) and Art. 82, Rule 137(5), first sentence, 
should be construed as permitting any limitation of searched subject-matter 
which is unitary with the originally claimed subject-matter, irrespective of 
whether the technical feature(s) used for the limitation has/have been 
searched. 
If amended claims are directed to subject-matter which has not been 
searched because it only appeared in the description (and the search 
division did not find it appropriate to extend the search to this 
subject-matter; see B-III, 3.5) and which does not combine with the 
originally claimed and searched invention or group of inventions to form a 
single general inventive concept (see F-V, 3), such amendments are not 
allowable. 
Rule 137(5), 
second sentence 
Rule 137(5), 
first sentence 
Part H – Chapter IV-10 

 
 
In other words, in order to assess whether or not amended claims fulfil the 
requirements of Rule 137(5), first sentence, the examining division needs to 
establish first whether or not the subject-matter to which they relate has or 
should have been searched (see B-III, 3) and second whether or not an 
objection of lack of unity would have been raised if the amended claims had 
been present in the set of claims on file at the time of the search. 
As a consequence, an objection under Rule 137(5), first sentence, will 
normally arise if the applicant attempts to replace a technical feature 
contained in a claim with a technical feature taken from the description and 
having an effect unrelated to the effect(s) of the features of the originally 
claimed invention(s). 
If an objection under Rule 137(5), first sentence, is raised, the examining 
division provides a reasoning why the subject-matter has not been 
searched (see B-III, 3) and why the subject-matter does not combine with 
the originally claimed invention or inventions to form a single general 
inventive concept (see F-V, 3). Applicants are informed that they may 
continue to pursue such subject-matter only in the form of a divisional 
application under Art. 76. 
The situation described above is different from amendments corresponding 
to an invention originally claimed but not searched under Rule 64, or 
Rule 164(1) or Rule 164(2), which are dealt with in H-II, 6.2. 
Applicants should bear in mind that the examination procedure should be 
brought to a conclusion in as few actions as possible. Therefore, the 
examining division may exercise its right not to admit further amendments 
under Rule 137(3) (see H-II, 2.3). 
4.2 Euro-PCT applications 
For Euro-PCT applications where the EPO acted as ISA or SISA, the 
examining division has to issue an invitation under Rule 164(2) for any now 
claimed but unsearched invention contained in the originally filed 
application documents (description, claims and drawings, if any) which are 
to serve as the basis for examination upon expiry of the six-month time limit 
set in the communication under Rule 161 or Rule 162 (see C-III, 3.1). 
5. 
Compliance of amendments with other EPC requirements 
5.1 General principles 
The other EPC requirements with which amendments have to comply will 
depend on whether the amendments are filed in examination, opposition or 
limitation proceedings (see below). 
5.2 In examination proceedings 
The question of allowability of amendments is legally a question of whether 
the application as so amended is allowable. An amended application must 
of course satisfy all the requirements of the EPC including, in particular, 
inventive step and the other matters listed in B-XI, 3.6 (see also C-III, 2). 
Also, however, especially when the claims have been substantially limited, 
Rule 137(3) 
 

Part H – Chapter IV-11 
 
the examining division needs to bear in mind that the following questions 
may require special consideration at the amendment stage. 
(i) 
Unity of invention 
Do the amended claims still satisfy the requirements of Art. 82? If the 
search report seems to reveal lack of novelty or inventive step in the 
concept common to all the claims, but the amended claims do not 
necessitate further search, the examining division will consider 
carefully whether an objection of lack of unity is justified at this stage 
of the proceedings (see F-V, 6). If, however, the claims lack a 
common inventive concept and a further search is necessary, then 
an objection is raised. 
(ii) 
Agreement of description and claims 
If the claims have been amended, will the description require 
corresponding amendment to remove serious inconsistency between 
them? For example, is every embodiment of the invention described 
still within the scope of one or more claims? (see F-IV, 4.3 and 
H-V, 2.7). Conversely, are all of the amended claims supported by 
the description? (see F-IV, 6). Also, if the categories of claims have 
been altered, will the title require corresponding amendment 
(see H-V, 8)? 
5.3 In opposition proceedings 
The proprietors of the patent generally have to indicate the basis in the 
original application documents or claims of the granted patent from which 
the amendments may be derived (Art. 100(c) and Art. 123(2)). In addition, 
they should file observations as regards the patentability of the 
subject-matter 
of 
the 
patent 
as 
amended 
(with 
reference 
to 
Art. 100(a) and (b)), taking into account the state of the art and objections 
raised in the opposition notice together, where appropriate, with the 
evidence presented in support. 
Opposition is not an opportunity to re-examine the whole patent; it is the 
amendments introduced into the patent which must be examined as to 
whether they comply with the EPC as a whole (see G 3/14, T 227/88 and 
T 301/87). Therefore the opposition division will check that the patent, by 
the amendments themselves, does not contravene the requirements of the 
EPC (with the exception of Art. 82, see G 1/91 and D-V, 2). With respect to 
Art. 84, see D-V, 5. For the form of amended documents, see H-III, 2.2 to 
H-III, 2.4. The formal requirements, in particular those specified by 
Rules 30 to 34, Rules 42, 43, 48 and 50, and the decision of the President 
of the EPO dated 25 November 2022, OJ EPO 2022, A113, must also be 
satisfied (see Rule 86). 
5.4 In limitation proceedings 
Limitation is not an opportunity to re-examine the whole patent; only the 
amended claims are to be examined with regard to Art. 84 and Art. 123(2) 
and (3), i.e. what needs to be considered is whether the requested 
Part H – Chapter IV-12 

 
 
amendments introduce a deficiency within the meaning of those provisions. 
Claims as granted or as maintained are not examined anew. 
5.4.1 Art. 84 
It is also to be verified that the amended claims are in conformity with 
Art. 84. For the interpretation of clarity under Art. 84 in limitation 
proceedings, the usual standards apply (see F-IV, 4, 5 and 6). Note in this 
respect that mere clarifications made to the claims, in particular to 
dependent claims, cannot be allowed unless they are necessitated by the 
limitation(s) introduced elsewhere in the claims. 
5.4.2 Examination of the description and/or drawings 
Rule 95(2) requires only the amended claims to be examined in limitation 
proceedings. Nonetheless, if the applicant has not filed amendments to the 
description, the examining division checks whether the amended claims are 
still supported by the description. If this is not the case, in accordance with 
Rule 95(2) the proprietor is requested to amend either the description or the 
claims, in order to comply with Art. 84. In this context it is pointed out that 
the examining division may not adapt the description of its own motion. 
If, however, for the purpose of limitation an amended description and/or 
drawings are presented together with the claims, these are to be checked, 
but only for compliance with the requirements of Art. 123(2) and (3) and 
Art. 84. Note that in this respect amendments made to the description 
solely in order to improve the patent, or cosmetic changes which are not 
necessitated by the limited claims, cannot be allowed. 
5.4.3 Points to be disregarded 
In limitation proceedings there is no examination as to why a request for 
limitation was filed or whether the goal of the limitation has been achieved, 
for example if the amended and limited claims are truly novel vis-à-vis a 
particular prior art document. 
In general there is no need to verify whether the limited claims contravene 
any of Art. 52 to  57. It may however happen that limitation results in 
prima facie non-compliance with the patentability criteria, e.g. Art. 53, in 
which case the examining division will communicate this non-compliance to 
the requester. 
Examples: 
A granted claim directed to a generic plant is limited to a specific plant 
variety. As the amended claim then relates to a plant variety per se it is 
excluded from patentability under Art. 53(b) (G 1/98). 
A claim granted to a device comprising a controlled explosion system is 
limited to a claim reciting an anti-personnel mine comprising the controlled 
explosion system, which would be contrary to Art. 53(a). 
 

Part H – Chapter V-1 
 
Chapter V – Allowability of amendments – 
examples 
1. Introduction 
Chapter H-V provides additional guidance and examples relating to a 
number of typical situations where compliance with Art. 123(2) and/or 
Art. 123(3) is an issue. However, it must be borne in mind that the 
allowability of a specific amendment is ultimately to be decided on a case-
by-case basis. 
2. Amendments in the description 
2.1 Clarification of a technical effect 
Where a technical feature was clearly disclosed in the original application 
but its effect was not mentioned or not mentioned fully, yet it can be 
deduced without difficulty by a person skilled in the art from the application 
as filed, subsequent clarification of that effect in the description does not 
contravene Art. 123(2). 
2.2 Introduction of further examples and new effects 
Amendment by the introduction of further examples always needs to be 
looked at very carefully in the light of the general considerations outlined in 
H-IV, 2. The same applies to the introduction of statements of new 
(i.e. previously not mentioned) effects of the invention such as new 
technical advantages. For example, if the invention as originally presented 
related to a process for cleaning woollen clothing consisting of treating the 
clothing with a particular fluid, the applicant is not allowed to introduce later 
into the description a statement that the process also has the advantage of 
protecting the clothing against moth damage. 
Under certain circumstances, however, later filed examples or new effects, 
even if not allowed into the application, may nevertheless be taken into 
account by the examining division as evidence in support of the 
patentability of the claimed invention. For instance, an additional example 
may be accepted as evidence that the invention can be readily applied, on 
the basis of the information given in the originally filed application, over the 
whole field claimed (see F-IV, 6.3). Similarly a new effect may be 
considered as evidence in support of inventive step, provided that this new 
effect is implied by or at least related to an effect disclosed in the originally 
filed application (see G-VII, 10). 
2.3 Supplementary technical information 
Any supplementary technical information submitted after the filing date of 
the application will be added to the part of the file which is open to public 
inspection unless excluded from public inspection pursuant to Rule 144(d). 
From the date on which the information is added to the open part of the file, 
it forms part of the state of the art within the meaning of Art. 54(2). In order 
to notify the public of the existence of such information submitted after the 
application was filed and not included in the specification, an appropriate 
mention will be printed on the cover page of the patent specification. 
Art. 123(2) 
Art. 123(2) 
Part H – Chapter V-2 

 
 
2.4 Revision of stated technical problem 
Care must also be taken to ensure that any amendment to, or subsequent 
insertion of, a statement of the technical problem solved by the invention 
meets Art. 123(2). For example it may happen that following restriction of 
the claims to meet an objection of lack of inventive step, it is desired to 
revise the stated problem to emphasise an effect attainable by the thus 
restricted invention but not by the prior art. 
It must be remembered that such revision is only permissible if the effect 
emphasised is one deducible by a person skilled in the art without difficulty 
from the application as filed (see H-V, 2.1 and 2.2 above). 
If the suggested amendment would contravene Art. 123(2), it will be 
necessary to amend the description in some other way, e.g. by defining the 
problem in more general terms or by omitting any express statement of the 
problem altogether. 
2.5 Reference document 
Features from a cross-referenced document can, under particular 
conditions be introduced by way of amendment into the claims of an 
application (see H-IV, 2.2.1). 
2.6 Alteration, excision or addition of text in the description 
Alteration or excision of the text, as well as the addition of further text, may 
introduce fresh subject-matter. For instance, suppose an invention related 
to a multi-layer laminated panel, and the description included several 
examples of different layered arrangements, one of these having an outer 
layer of polyethylene; amendment of this example either to alter the outer 
layer to polypropylene or to omit this layer altogether would not normally be 
allowable. In each case, the panel disclosed by the amendment example 
would be quite different from that originally disclosed and, hence, the 
amendment would introduce fresh subject-matter and therefore be 
unallowable. 
2.7 Bringing the description into line with amended claims 
The description must be brought into line with amended claims by 
amending it as needed to meet the requirements set out in F-II, 4.2, 
F-IV, 4.3(iii) and F-IV, 4.4. 
If the applicant does not amend the description as required despite being 
asked to do so, the examining division's next action may be to issue a 
summons to oral proceedings; for the time limit, E-III, 6(iii) applies. 
3. 
Amendments in claims 
Replacement or removal of features from a claim, as well as the addition of 
further features, may introduce fresh subject-matter not only in the claim 
itself, but also in the claims when considered as a whole. In fact, such 
amendments could result in a combination of features not disclosed in the 
application as filed when the amended claim is considered together with its 
dependent claims and/or the claims on which it depends. 
 

Part H – Chapter V-3 
 
3.1 Replacement or removal of features from a claim 
The requirements of Art. 123(2) are only met if the replacement or removal 
of a feature lies within the limits of what a skilled person would derive 
directly and unambiguously, using common general knowledge and seen 
objectively and relative to the date of filing (or the date of priority according 
to Art. 89), from the whole of the application documents (G 3/89, G 11/91 
and G 2/10). 
If the amendment by replacing or removing a feature from a claim fails to 
pass the following test by at least one criterion, it necessarily contravenes 
the requirements of Art. 123(2): 
(i) 
the replaced or removed feature was not explained as essential in 
the originally filed disclosure; 
(ii) 
the skilled person would directly and unambiguously recognise that 
the feature is not, as such, indispensable for the function of the 
invention in the light of the technical problem the invention serves to 
solve (in this context special care needs to be taken in cases where 
the technical problem is reformulated during the proceedings, see 
H-V, 2.4 and G-VII, 11); and 
(iii) 
the skilled person would recognise that the replacement or removal 
requires no modification of one or more features to compensate for 
the change (it does not in itself alter the invention). 
However, even if the above criteria are met, the division must still ensure 
that the amendment by replacing or removing a feature from a claim 
satisfies the requirements of Art. 123(2) as they also have been set out in 
G 3/89 and G 11/91, referred to in G 2/10 as "the gold standard". 
If several features are deleted from an independent claim, so that for 
example it is restricted to only part of the originally claimed subject-matter, 
the subject-matter of the amended claim must be directly and 
unambiguously derivable from the application as filed as being an invention 
per se, i.e. it must solve a technical problem and be able to work in the 
absence of any of the particular features being deleted. 
The removal of a limiting feature from an independent granted claim is 
likely to result in broadening the scope of protection afforded and could 
therefore contravene Art. 123(3). Likewise, if a feature in a granted claim is 
replaced, compliance with Art. 123(3) has to be carefully checked. 
3.2 Inclusion of additional features 
A claim may be limited by the inclusion of additional features, provided the 
resulting combination was directly and unambiguously disclosed in the 
application as originally filed in an explicit or implicit manner (see H-IV, 2.1) 
and does not relate to an invention which was not searched (see H-IV, 4 
and H-II, 6.2). If the resulting combination is novel over the application as 
originally filed (see the test for novelty given in G-VI, 2), the amended claim 
does not fulfil the requirements of Art. 123(2). 
Art. 123(2) 
Art. 123(3) 
Art. 123(2) 
Part H – Chapter V-4 

 
 
The fact that the resulting combination can be seen as: 
– 
"not inconsistent" with the description (T 495/06) or 
– 
"reasonably plausible" (T 824/06) or 
– 
"obvious" in view of the application (T 329/99) 
is not sufficient for an amendment to be allowable under Art. 123(2), since 
its direct and unambiguous disclosure is required. 
A claim may be limited by inclusion of additional features, for example: 
(a) 
from dependent claims, which were dependent on the claim to be 
limited; 
(b) 
from the description (see also H-V, 3.2.1); 
(c) 
from drawings (see H-V, 6); 
(d) 
arising from the conversion of an independent claim to a dependent 
claim; 
provided the above requirements are fulfilled. 
3.2.1 Intermediate generalisations 
Extracting a specific feature in isolation from an originally disclosed 
combination of features and using it to delimit claimed subject-matter may 
be allowed only if there is no structural and functional relationship between 
the features. 
When evaluating whether the limitation of a claim by a feature extracted 
from a combination of features fulfils the requirements of Art. 123(2), the 
content of the application as filed must not be considered to be a reservoir 
from which individual features pertaining to separate embodiments can be 
combined in order to artificially create a particular combination. 
When a feature is taken from a particular embodiment and added to the 
claim, it has to be established that: 
– 
the feature is not related or inextricably linked to the other features of 
that embodiment and 
– 
the overall disclosure justifies the generalising isolation of the feature 
and its introduction into the claim. 
These conditions are to be understood as an aid to assessing, in the 
particular case of an intermediate generalisation, if the amendment fulfils 
the requirements of Art. 123(2). In any case it has to be ensured that the 
skilled person is not presented with information which is not directly and 
unambiguously derivable from the originally filed application, even when 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part H – Chapter V-5 
 
account is taken of matter which is implicit to a person skilled in the art 
using the common general knowledge. 
Example 1 
The amended claim relates to a heddle for the harness of a loom. The 
original claim was limited by introducing features that were disclosed only in 
connection with a specific embodiment in which the eyelet of the heddle 
had the shape of a spindle. This shape was not included in the amended 
claim. In the general part of the description it was also mentioned that the 
eyelet could also have other shapes such as an elliptic shape. Therefore 
the board concluded that the amendment was allowable under Art. 123(2) 
(T 300/06). 
Example 2 
Claim 1 relates to a water dispersible and flushable absorbent article. 
Amended claim 1 specifies that each of the first and second fibrous 
assemblies is a wet laid tissue. The application as filed referred, in 
connection with the first fibrous assembly, to a wet laid tissue in 
combination with other features (tissue is apertured; tissue is provided with 
fibrils or sufficient inherent porosity). 
Since the first fibrous assembly is disclosed in the application as filed as 
being a wet laid tissue only in combination with other features which are not 
present in claim 1, the amendments made constitute a generalisation of the 
originally disclosed technical information and thereby introduce subject-
matter extending beyond the content of the application as filed (T 1164/04). 
Example 3 
Original claim 1 relates to a coating composition comprising at least one 
rosin compound, at least one polymer and an antifoulant. 
After amendment a new claim was introduced relating to a method for 
preparing a coating composition comprising the mixing of at least one rosin 
compound, at least one polymer and an antifoulant. The only basis for the 
method is the examples. The board observed that for some solutions the 
amount of added rosin was extremely low whereas for others it was 
extremely high. The subject-matter of the amended claim was considered 
to be an unallowable generalisation of the examples, since nothing in the 
description indicated to the person skilled in the art that the observed 
variations were not essential to make a coating composition (T 200/04). 
Example 4 
Original claim 1 relates to a multi-processing system comprising a shared 
memory, a directory and a serialisation point. The serialisation point is 
defined in functional terms. Claim 1 was amended by adding features that 
were addressed in the description as part of the cache coherence strategy. 
The board held that the incorporated features, albeit disclosed as such, had 
been isolated in an arbitrary manner from the overall disclosure of the 
cache coherent memory access architecture. At least one feature had been 
Part H – Chapter V-6 

 
 
omitted although its function was presented as being essential to achieving 
cache coherence. Therefore amended claim 1 was not directly and 
unambiguously derivable from the original application (T 166/04). 
3.3 Deletion of part of the claimed subject-matter 
It is permissible to delete parts of the claimed subject-matter if the 
corresponding embodiments were originally described, e.g. as alternatives 
in the claim or as embodiments explicitly set out in the description.  
Example: 
Original application:  
"A polymer blend XY ... containing, as a filler, 
graphite, talc, asbestos or silica" 
Prior art: 
"A polymer blend XY ... containing asbestos". 
Limited claim: 
"A polymer blend XY ... containing, as a filler, 
graphite, talc or silica". 
The deletion of alternatives from more than one list is only allowable if this 
does not result in the creation of new technical information that is not 
directly and unambiguously derivable from the application as originally filed. 
In particular, limitations that do not result in the singling out of a particular 
combination of specific features but maintain the remaining subject-matter 
as a generic group which differs from the original group only by its smaller 
size will normally fulfil the requirements of Art. 123(2) EPC. 
Deletion of part of the claimed subject-matter resulting in a combination of 
specific features may be allowable if the application as filed provides a 
pointer towards that particular combination, e.g. by reference to particular 
embodiments. 
These principles also apply to the combination of features resulting from 
dependent claims. 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part H – Chapter V-7 
 
Example 
Original claim 1  
"A composition for therapeutic use comprising a 
therapeutic agent and a glass-forming 
carbohydrate." 
Original claim 22 
"A composition according to claim 1 wherein the 
therapeutic agent is selected from the group 
enzymes, biopharmaceuticals, growth hormones, 
growth factors, insulin, monoclonal antibodies, 
interferons, interleukins and cytokines." 
Original disclosure 
In the description, inhalation is listed as one of 
several ways of administration. 
In the description, insulin is listed as one of 
several therapeutic agents. 
Limited claim 1 
"A composition for therapeutic use suitable for 
administration by inhalation comprising a 
therapeutic agent and a glass-forming 
carbohydrate". 
Dependent claim 10 
"A composition according to claim 1 wherein the 
therapeutic agent is insulin" 
The limitation to inhalation in claim 1 results from a choice from one list and 
has a basis in the application as originally filed. 
The combination of the subject-matter of dependent claim 10 with the 
subject-matter of claim 1 results from a selection from multiple lists which is 
not disclosed directly and unambiguously in the application as originally 
filed. 
The number of amendments held to have been combined to arrive at the 
amended claimed subject-matter is not decisive in order to assess whether 
the claimed subject-matter extends beyond the content of the application as 
filed. What is required is an analysis of whether the claimed subject-matter 
is explicitly or implicitly, but directly and unambiguously, disclosed in the 
application as filed. 
Wherever possible, the claim should be limited by a positive indication of 
what subject-matter remains instead of stating what is being deleted from 
the subject-matter (as a disclaimer would do). 
Example: 
– 
"... a polyether of molecular weight from 600 to 10 000" restricted to 
"... above 1 500 to 10 000" (T 433/86). 
3.4 Further cases of broadening of claims 
The deletion of a statement regarding use or intended purpose in an 
independent product claim fulfils the requirements of Art. 123(2) only if the 
application as filed offers a basis for the assumption that the product can 
Art. 123(2) 
Part H – Chapter V-8 

 
 
also be used in some other way (and if the statement of purpose does not 
amount to a functional limitation). 
The broadening of a claim by exchanging a particular feature for a more 
general feature cannot be based on an indication that it would be obvious 
for a skilled person (see also H-V, 3.2.1). 
Moreover, the deletion of a particular feature or its replacement by a more 
general feature usually leads to a broadening of the claim. Therefore, the 
requirements of Art. 123(3) are not fulfilled. 
3.5 Amendments relating to ranges 
In the case of a disclosure of both a general and a preferred range, a 
combination of the preferred disclosed narrower range and one of the part-
ranges lying within the disclosed overall range on either side of the 
narrower range can usually be derived from the original disclosure of the 
application. 
4. 
Disclaimers 
4.1 Disclaimer disclosed in the application as originally filed 
In this case, the original application already indicates that specific subject-
matter is not part of the invention. 
Negative features help to define the claimed invention in the same way as 
positive ones, and must be examined on the same basis. In other words, 
they may confer novelty and, like positive features, are assessed as to their 
relevance to inventive step. They must also fulfil the requirements of Art. 84 
(clarity, conciseness and support), and their inclusion in the claims must not 
infringe Art. 123(2) (T 170/87, T 365/88). 
Examples: 
– 
"... said delivery means does not comprise a capacitor element"; 
– 
"... with the proviso that blends having a melt index of lower than 
0.05 are excluded". 
Negative features, like positive ones, may be structural or functional, and 
may relate to either a physical entity or an activity. 
4.2 Disclaimers not disclosed in the application as originally filed 
4.2.1 The subject-matter to be excluded is not disclosed in the 
application as originally filed (so-called undisclosed disclaimers) 
Limiting the scope of a claim by using a "disclaimer" to exclude a technical 
feature not disclosed in the application as filed may be allowable under 
Art. 123(2) in the following cases (see G 1/03 and G 1/16 and F-IV, 4.20): 
(i) 
restoring novelty over a disclosure under Art. 54(3); 
Art. 123(3) 
Art. 123(2) 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part H – Chapter V-9 
 
(ii) 
restoring novelty over an accidental anticipation under Art. 54(2). 
"An anticipation is accidental if it is so unrelated to and remote from 
the claimed invention that the person skilled in the art would never 
have taken it into consideration when making the invention". The 
status of "accidental" is to be ascertained without looking at the 
available further state of the art. A related document does not 
become an accidental anticipation merely because there are other 
disclosures even more closely related. The fact that a document is 
not considered to be the closest prior art is insufficient for achieving 
the status of "accidental". An accidental disclosure has nothing to do 
with the teaching of the claimed invention, since it is not relevant for 
examining inventive step. For example, this is the case when the 
same compounds serve as starting materials in entirely different 
reactions yielding different end products (see T 298/01). A prior art, 
the teaching of which leads away from the invention, however, does 
not constitute an accidental anticipation; the fact that the novelty 
destroying disclosure is a comparative example is also insufficient for 
achieving the status of "accidental" (see T 14/01 and T 1146/01); 
(iii) 
removing subject-matter which, under Art. 52 to Art. 57, is excluded 
from patentability for non-technical reasons. For example, the 
insertion of "non-human" in order to satisfy the requirements of 
Art. 53(a) is allowable. 
These criteria notwithstanding the introduction of the undisclosed 
disclaimer may not provide a technical contribution to the subject-matter 
disclosed in the application as filed. The undisclosed disclaimer (which 
inevitably quantitatively reduces the original technical teaching) may not 
qualitatively change the original technical teaching in the sense that the 
applicant's or patent proprietor's position with regard to other requirements 
for patentability is improved. In particular, it may not be or become relevant 
for the assessment of inventive step or for the question of sufficiency of 
disclosure. Hence, the evaluation of inventive step has to be carried out 
disregarding the undisclosed disclaimer (see G 1/16). 
The disclaimer may not remove more than necessary either to restore 
novelty (cases (i) and (ii) above) or to disclaim subject-matter excluded 
from patentability for non-technical reasons (case (iii) above). 
An undisclosed disclaimer is, in particular, not allowable if: 
(i) 
it is made in order to exclude non-working embodiments or remedy 
insufficient disclosure; 
(ii) 
it makes a technical contribution. 
(iii) 
the limitation is relevant for assessing inventive step; 
(iv) 
the disclaimer, which would otherwise be allowable on the basis of a 
conflicting application alone (Art. 54(3)), renders the invention novel 
or inventive over a separate prior art document under Art. 54(2), 
which is a not accidental anticipation of the claimed invention; 
Part H – Chapter V-10 

 
 
(v) 
the disclaimer based on a conflicting application also serves another 
purpose, e.g. it removes a deficiency under Art. 83. 
Art. 84 applies equally to the claim per se and to the disclaimer itself (see 
T 2130/11). 
In the interest of the patent's transparency, the excluded prior art must be 
indicated in the description in accordance with Rule 42(1)(b) and the 
relation between the prior art and the disclaimer must be shown. 
4.2.2 The subject-matter to be excluded is disclosed in the 
application as originally filed 
The test to be applied is whether the subject-matter remaining in the claim 
after the introduction of the disclaimer is, be it explicitly or implicitly, directly 
and unambiguously disclosed in the application as filed to the skilled 
person using its common general knowledge at the date of filing (or the 
date of priority according to Art. 89), see G 2/10, Headnote 1a. 
This test is the same as that applied when the allowability of a limitation of 
a claim by a positively defined feature is to be determined (see H-V, 3.2). 
When it comes to determining whether, after the introduction of the 
disclaimer, the claim infringes Art. 123(2) or whether it is in conformity with 
it, this cannot be decided solely by establishing that the disclaimed subject-
matter is disclosed in the application as filed. 
Whether the skilled person is presented with new information depends on 
how he or she would understand the amended claim, i.e. the subject-matter 
remaining in the amended claim and on whether, using common general 
knowledge, he or she would regard that subject-matter as at least implicitly 
disclosed in the application as filed. 
What is required is an assessment of the overall technical circumstances of 
the individual case under consideration, taking into account the nature and 
extent of the disclosure in the application as filed, the nature and extent of 
the disclaimed subject-matter and its relationship with the subject-matter 
remaining in the claim after the amendment. 
In this respect it has to be established whether the disclaiming of subject-
matter leads for example to the singling out of compounds or sub-classes 
of compounds or other so-called intermediate generalisations not 
specifically mentioned or implicitly disclosed in the application as filed 
(see G 2/10). 
Whether the invention works for the claimed subject-matter and what 
problem is credibly solved by it are questions which are not relevant for 
assessing whether this subject-matter extends beyond the content of the 
application as filed (see T 2130/11). 
5. 
Amendments to drawings 
It sometimes occurs that the drawings used for publication of the 
application are not those originally filed but are subsequently filed drawings, 
 

Part H – Chapter V-11 
 
because the latter are more suitable for reproduction (for drawings filed 
under Rule 56, see A-II, 5 and subsections and for drawings filed under 
Rule 56a, see A-II, 6 and subsections). In this case, the formalities officer in 
the Receiving Section will check that the subsequently filed drawings are 
identical to the originals. 
However, the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the subsequently filed 
drawings do not contain new technical information, which would conflict 
with Art. 123(2), rests with the examining division. 
If the examining division considers that these drawings conflict with 
Art. 123(2), it requires the applicant to submit other drawings which 
correspond exactly in substance to the drawings originally filed. 
It is not normally possible under Art. 123(2) to add completely new 
drawings to an application, since in most cases a new drawing cannot be 
unambiguously derivable from the mere text of the description. For the 
same reasons, amendments to drawings are carefully checked for 
compliance with Art. 123(2). 
6. Amendments derived from drawings 
Care needs to be taken when amendments are based on details which may 
only be derived from the schematic drawings of the original application. 
In particular, a figure which serves only to give a schematic explanation of 
the principle of the subject-matter of the invention and not to represent it in 
every detail does not allow the conclusion that the disclosed teaching 
purposively excluded a feature not represented. 
The manner in which a particular feature is depicted in the drawings may 
be accidental. The skilled person must be able to clearly and unmistakably 
recognise from the drawings, in the context of the whole description, that 
the added feature is the deliberate result of the technical considerations 
directed to the solution of the technical problem involved. 
For example, in an application relating to a vehicle where neither the claims 
nor the description contains any information about the location of the 
engine, the drawings may depict a vehicle in which approximately two 
thirds of the height of the engine is located below a plane tangent to the top 
of the wheels. An amendment which uses the generalised terms "the major 
portion of the height of the engine" to define that said major portion is 
located below the given level would infringe Art. 123(2) unless the skilled 
person would be able to recognise from the drawings, in the context of the 
whole description, that such a spatial arrangement of the engine with 
respect to the wheels is in fact a deliberate measure directed to the solution 
of the technical problem. 
7. Changes in claim category in opposition 
An amendment can be in the form of a change in the category of a claim, 
possibly combined with a change in the technical features of the invention. 
Firstly it must be clear that this amendment is necessitated by grounds for 
Rule 80 
Art. 123(2) and (3) 
Part H – Chapter V-12 

 
 
opposition (see H-II, 3.1). If that is not the case, a change of category is 
refused. 
Even if this condition is fulfilled, the opposition division exercises great 
caution in allowing a change of claim category, since the protection as 
conferred by the claims may thus be extended (Art. 123(3)). Examples are 
given in the following sections. Note that these examples could also give 
rise to issues under Art. 123(2). 
7.1 Product claim to use claim 
If a patent is so amended that a claim to a product (a physical entity) is 
replaced by a claim to the use of this product, the degree of protection is 
not extended, provided that the use claim in reality defines the use of a 
particular physical entity to achieve an effect and does not define such a 
use to produce a product (see G 2/88). 
7.2 Product claim to method claim 
If a patent is so amended that a claim to a product is replaced by a claim to 
a method for producing the product, this change of category is allowable, 
provided that the method now claimed only results in the product previously 
claimed. As it is a fundamental principle of European patent law that the 
protection conferred by a product claim covers all methods for production of 
the product, the limitation to one of these methods cannot extend the 
protection conferred originally (see T 5/90 and T 54/90). 
7.3 Method claim to product claim 
In general, a change in claim category from a method in which an 
apparatus is used to the apparatus itself is not allowable (see T 86/90). 
However, it may exceptionally be allowable to replace a claim directed to a 
method of operating a device by a claim directed to the device itself if the 
original claim contains the claimed features of the device exhaustively, 
whether in structural or functional terms (see T 378/86 and T 426/89). 
This exception, however, does not apply if the device as now claimed is for 
its features no longer dependent on the circumstances of its operation 
whereas it depended on them under the terms of the prior method claim 
(see T 82/93). 
Moreover, changing the category from a purpose-limited process claim in 
the format of a Swiss-type claim in accordance with G 5/83 to a purpose-
limited product claim in accordance with Art. 54(5) contravenes Art. 123(3), 
because a purpose-limited process claim confers less protection than a 
purpose-limited product claim (T 1673/11). 
7.4 Method claim to use claim 
The change from a process for the preparation of a product to the use of 
the product for a purpose other than previously claimed is not allowable 
(see T 98/85 and T 194/85). 
 

Part H – Chapter V-13 
 
On the other hand, the change in a claim from a method in which a certain 
product is used to a claim to the use of that product in performing that same 
method is allowable (see T 332/94). 
8. Changes in the title 
The sole purpose of the title is to inform the public about the technical 
information disclosed in the application. The title has no bearing on the 
content of the application as filed or on the protection conferred by the 
patent, once granted. Furthermore, the title is not part of the documents to 
be approved by an applicant before a patent can be granted. 
Thus the ultimate responsibility for the title rests with the division, and it is 
within the division's discretion to accept or not any request from the 
applicant for a change in the title (see also A-III, 7). 
 

Part H – Chapter VI-1 
 
Chapter VI – Correction of errors 
1. Introduction 
Documents filed with the EPO may contain errors, e.g. in the bibliographic 
data, the description, the claims or the drawings (see H-VI, 2). Errors may 
also occur in the decision to grant or other decisions of the EPO 
(see H-VI, 3), in formatting/editing (see H-VI, 4), as well as in printing the 
specification (see H-VI, 6). 
These errors can be corrected as set out below. 
2. Corrections of errors in documents filed with the EPO 
Corrections under Rule 139 concern linguistic errors, errors of transcription 
and other mistakes in documents filed with the EPO, especially in 
application documents (see H-VI, 2.2.1). 
However, see also A-VII, 7 for the correction of errors in a translation of a 
patent application, A-III, 5.5 for the correction of the designation of inventor 
and A-III, 6.5.2 for the correction/addition of a priority claim. 
Requests for correction under Rule 139 are dealt with by the department 
responsible for the proceedings: 
(i) 
In examination and opposition proceedings, the correction of errors 
under Rule 139 is the responsibility of the formalities officer, with the 
exception of errors in the description, claims and drawings (see the 
decision of the President of the EPO dated 12 December 2013, 
OJ EPO 2014, A6, Art. 1, point 22, and Art. 2, point 21). 
(ii) 
Where the Receiving Section is responsible (Rule 10(1)), it decides 
on requests for correction unless the request requires technical 
examination. In the latter case, the examining division will decide on 
the request once it has assumed responsibility (see J 4/85). 
2.1 Admissibility 
The correction of linguistic errors, errors of transcription and other mistakes 
in any document filed with the EPO may in principle be requested as long 
as proceedings are pending before the EPO (J 42/92). However, during 
examination proceedings, such requests for correction can be considered 
only if the decision-making process has not yet been concluded, in other 
words at the latest on the day before the date on which the decision to 
grant is handed over to the EPO's internal postal service for transmittal to 
the applicant (see G 12/91; date "to EPO postal service" printed at the 
bottom of Form 2006A). See also H-II, 2.6, last paragraph. 
Moreover, other time limitations apply to requests under Rule 139: 
(i) 
In the case of correction of bibliographic data (e.g. priority, 
designation) or of procedural declarations (e.g. withdrawal), time 
limitations may derive from the protection of the interests of the 
public. For instance, in the absence of any special circumstances, a 
request for correction of a priority claim by the addition of a first 
Rule 139 
Rule 139 
Part H – Chapter VI-2 

 
 
priority needs to be made sufficiently early for a warning to be 
included in the publication of the application (J 6/91). Otherwise, 
correction is possible only where it is apparent on the face of the 
published application that a mistake has been made (see also 
A-V, 3). An erroneous withdrawal of an application may only be 
corrected if, at the time when the request for correction is made, the 
public has not yet been officially notified of the withdrawal (J 25/03). 
(ii) 
Limitations on requesting the correction of an error in a document 
filed with the EPO also exist where a decision has already been 
taken or a procedural phase terminated on the basis of the document 
containing the error. A request under Rule 139 cannot reinstate an 
applicant into an earlier procedural phase or reverse the effects of a 
decision already taken (J 3/01, see also H-VI, 3.1). Such a request is 
therefore inadmissible in these cases. 
2.1.1 Admissibility in opposition and limitation proceedings 
Errors in documents filed during opposition and limitation proceedings may 
be corrected under Rule 139 (G 1/12) as long as the corresponding 
proceedings are pending before the EPO. 
In opposition and limitation, requests to correct an error under Rule 139 
may not, however, be used to correct the content of the decision to grant, 
thereby circumventing the restrictions under Rule 140. 
2.1.1.1 Errors in the description, claims and drawings 
The submission by the proprietor of an amended specification containing 
the correction of an obvious error will be admitted: 
– 
in opposition proceedings if the correction is part of an amendment 
going beyond the mere removal of an error, namely an amendment 
occasioned by a ground for opposition (see H-II, 3); 
Therefore, if the proprietor files an amended specification fulfilling the 
requirements of Rule 80, they can additionally request the correction 
of an obvious error under Rule 139 (see T 657/11). This request for 
correction will be dealt with by the opposition division (see H-VI, 2), 
as described in H-VI, 2.2 to H-VI, 2.2.1. 
– 
in limitation proceedings if the correction is part of an amendment 
going beyond the mere removal of an error, namely an amendment 
constituting a limitation vis-à-vis the claims as granted or amended, 
and complies with Art. 84 and Art. 123 (see D-X, 4.3). 
In other words, if an amended set of claims fulfilling the requirements of 
Rule 95(2) is filed in limitation proceedings, obvious errors can be corrected 
under Rule 139. 
2.2 Allowability 
Corrections of clerical or grammatical errors are usually allowed, in so far 
as it is evident that an error has occurred and what the correction should 
Rule 80 
Rule 95(2) 
Rule 139 
Art. 123(2) 
 

Part H – Chapter VI-3 
 
be. The request for correction has to be made without undue delay after the 
error has been discovered (G 1/12, J 16/08). 
However, correction of errors in the description, claims and drawings is a 
special form of amendment and is bound by Art. 123(2) (G 2/95; see also 
H-VI, 2.2.1). These errors can be corrected as set out below. 
2.2.1 Correction of description, claims and drawings 
Where the mistake is in the description, claims or drawings, both the error 
and the correction must be such that it is immediately evident: 
(i) 
that an error has occurred; and 
(ii) 
what the correction should be. 
Regarding (i), the incorrect information must be objectively recognisable for 
a skilled person, using common general knowledge, from the originally-filed 
application documents (description, claims and drawings) taken by 
themselves. 
Regarding (ii), the correction needs to be within the limits of what a skilled 
person would derive directly and unambiguously, using common general 
knowledge, and seen objectively and relative to the date of filing, from the 
originally-filed application documents. 
In other words, the requirements of Art. 123(2) apply mutatis mutandis. 
Evidence of what was common general knowledge on the date of filing may 
be furnished in any suitable form. 
The priority documents cannot be used for the purposes mentioned under 
(i) and (ii) above (see G 3/89 and G 11/91). 
Correction under Rule 139, second sentence, is of a strictly declaratory 
nature and establishes what a skilled person, using common general 
knowledge, would derive on the date of filing from the parts of a European 
patent application, seen as a whole, relating to the disclosure (see G 3/89 
and G 11/91 mentioned above). Therefore, the complete replacement of 
the application documents (i.e. description, claims and drawings) by other 
documents is not possible (see G 2/95). 
Some examples of allowable corrections: 
(I) 
The replacement of "respectfully" by "respectively" in a claim 
(T 34/03). 
(II) 
The addition of the plural "s" to the word "particle" as the 
corresponding verb "have" was in the plural form, and the application 
as originally filed described a particle size distribution. Since particle 
size distributions can be defined only for a plurality of particles, the 
correction was held allowable (T 108/04). 
Part H – Chapter VI-4 

 
 
On the other hand, the applicant/proprietor cannot rely on: 
(a) 
A mere count of the number of instances of the relevant words in the 
application as originally filed for obtaining the replacement of one 
word by another word, for instance the substitution of "included" for 
"excluded", if it is not clear that an error has occurred and not 
possible to ascertain that nothing other than "included" was intended 
by the drafter (T 337/88). 
(b) 
Usual practice or industry standards for measuring concentrations of 
compounds in the relevant technical field, if the application as 
originally filed merely refers to "%", without clarification as to whether 
by weight or volume, and the description contains no clear guidance 
as to whether "%" refers to concentration by % by weight or % by 
volume or something different (T 48/02). 
(c) 
Common general knowledge in the absence of further evidence, 
such as an encyclopaedia or basic textbook, to argue for instance 
that the skilled person would have immediately recognised that an 
ASTM standard with a six-digit number did not exist before the 
priority date of a patent (T 881/02). 
2.2.2 Missing parts of description, missing drawings or correction of 
erroneously filed application documents filed as corrections under 
Rule 139 
The applicant may also request that missing parts of the description and/or 
missing drawings be included in the application documents by way of a 
correction according to Rule 139. In virtually all cases this will not be 
possible (see J 1/82). Similarly, it is not generally possible to completely 
replace erroneously filed application documents (description, claims or 
drawings) or parts by way of a correction under Rule 139 because that 
would require making it evident that nothing else was intended than what is 
offered as the corrected application documents. 
In extremely rare cases the other application documents might allow the 
skilled person to reconstruct the missing parts of the description and/or 
missing drawings such that they may be filed by way of a correction 
according to Rule 139. 
In contrast to missing parts of the description and/or missing drawings filed 
under Rule 56(3) and correct application documents subsequently filed 
under Rule 56a(4), corrections under Rule 139 can never be substantiated 
by merely referring to the priority document (see H-VI, 2.2.1). 
3. Correction of errors in decisions 
Correction of errors in decisions under Rule 140 must be clearly 
distinguished from correction of errors in documents filed by the applicant 
(or patentee) pursuant to Rule 139. For the latter, see A-V, 3 and H-VI, 2 
and subsections. Correction of errors made by the applicant (or patentee) 
in application (or patent) documents cannot be arrived at in a roundabout 
manner through correction of the decision to grant (or to maintain in 
amended form). 
 

Part H – Chapter VI-5 
 
Correction of a decision is allowable only if the text of the decision is 
manifestly other than intended by the department concerned. An error in 
the text of the patent that forms the basis for the decision cannot be 
imputed to the division by suggesting that the division did not intend to 
make a decision that in fact included the very text approved by the 
applicant (or patent proprietor) himself as a means of bringing the error 
within the ambit of Rule 140. Thus only linguistic errors, errors of 
transcription and obvious mistakes in decisions can be corrected. The 
correction of an error in a decision under Rule 140 has a retrospective 
effect (see T 212/88). Therefore, when the decision to be corrected is the 
refusal of the application or the revocation of the patent, the time limit for 
filing a notice of opposition or an appeal is not changed by the publication 
or the notification of the corrected decision. 
The competence to correct errors under Rule 140 lies with the body which 
took the decision (see e.g. G 8/95, J 12/85, J 16/99). 
Hence, even during opposition (or appeal) proceedings, the examining 
division is competent to correct errors in bibliographic data contained in the 
decision to grant (see H-VI, 3.3). Examining or opposition divisions are 
competent to correct errors in the text of the patent that was the subject of 
their respective decisions, including editing/formatting errors (see H-VI, 4). 
3.1 Admissibility 
Rule 140 is not available to correct errors in documents filed by a patent 
applicant or proprietor (G 1/10). The correction of such documents is 
admissible only under Rule 139 and only as long as proceedings are 
pending (see H-VI, 2.1). Once the decision to grant is handed over to the 
EPO's internal postal service (G 12/91), only errors in bibliographic data, 
printing errors in the publication of the patent specification and 
formatting/editing errors may be corrected (see H-VI, 3.2 and H-VI, 3.3). 
Since the final responsibility for the text of the patent lies with applicants or 
patentees, it is their duty to properly check all the documents making up the 
communication under Rule 71(3) (i.e. Form 2004 and the Druckexemplar). 
The same applies to documents as proposed for maintenance in amended 
form (see Rules 71(5), 82(1) and 95(2), Art. 113(2) and G 1/10). 
However, requests for correction under Rule 139 of documents on which 
the patent is granted may under certain conditions be submitted in 
opposition and limitation proceedings (see H-VI, 2.1.1). 
Corrections of decisions are to be made at the reasoned request of one of 
the parties or by the EPO of its own motion. If the request for correction is 
refused, this decision must be reasoned (see T 850/95). These reasons 
must previously have been communicated to the requester (Art. 113(1)). 
3.2 Allowability of the correction of bibliographic data 
The sole reason for allowing the correction of linguistic errors, errors of 
transcription and obvious mistakes is to ensure that the decision says what 
the division actually intended at the time of issue. If the bibliographic data 
referred to in the examining division's decision to grant or limit a patent or in 
Part H – Chapter VI-6 

 
 
the opposition division's communication under Rule 82(2) that a decision to 
maintain a patent in amended form has become final is not and obviously 
cannot be the bibliographic data corresponding to the real intention of the 
division, the bibliographic data erroneously indicated can be corrected 
under Rule 140. In this respect, it is irrelevant whether the error was 
originally introduced by the applicants in their submissions or by the 
division itself. 
In particular, misspellings or similar errors in the name of the patent 
proprietor may be corrected under Rule 140 wherever it does not result in 
the designation of a person different than the one originally named on filing 
(or their successor in title) and to whom the examining division intended to 
grant the patent. 
In accordance with the decision of the President of the EPO dated 
23 November 2015 (OJ EPO 2015, A104), requests for the correction of 
errors in bibliographic data are dealt with by formalities officers. 
3.3 Correction of the decision to grant while opposition proceedings 
are pending – procedural aspects 
Even during opposition proceedings, the examining division is competent to 
correct errors in its decision to grant, in particular errors in the decision's 
reasoning and bibliographic data, or formatting/editing errors in the text of 
the B1 publication (see H-VI, 3.2 and H-VI, 4). 
Thus the opposition division refers to the examining division any request 
under Rule 140 to correct such errors filed by the patent proprietor while 
opposition proceedings are pending. 
However, if the request for correction under Rule 140 is clearly 
inadmissible, i.e. the requested correction does not concern errors in 
bibliographic data contained in the decision to grant or formatting/editing 
errors in the text of the B1 publication, the opposition division continues the 
proceedings until the decision under Art. 101 is taken without waiting for 
closure of the proceedings before the examining division concerning the 
correction (in line with the reasoning of G 1/10). The procedural decision to 
continue the proceedings is appealable together with the opposition 
decision. 
If the request for correction is admissible, the examining division processes 
it without delay in order to minimise or avoid delays to the opposition 
proceedings. The opposition division may wait for closure of the 
proceedings before the examining division. 
4. Correction of formatting/editing errors 
Formatting/editing errors which were already contained in the text approved 
by the applicant may be corrected by the EPO of its own motion or at the 
request of the patent proprietor. Formatting/editing errors are alterations in 
the patent documents which occur during the preparation of the 
Druckexemplar and which are indicated neither by standard marks nor in 
Form 2004. 
 

Part H – Chapter VI-7 
 
Example 1 
In the Druckexemplar, page 10 contains two changes: 
− 
the first change is indicated with standard marks; 
− 
the second change is in a different paragraph on page 10 to the first 
change, and consists in the absence of the two top lines, but the 
deletion is not indicated by any standard mark (i.e. the two lines have 
just disappeared). 
After publication of the grant, the applicant spots the errors and requests: 
(a) 
the correction of a spelling error in the first change introduced by the 
examining division; 
(b) 
the re-insertion of the top two lines that have disappeared. 
Request (a) cannot be accepted, as the error is in the marked change. 
However, request (b) regarding the second change is a formatting/editing 
error. Thus, the request to reinstate the two top lines can be granted. 
Example 2 
EPO Form 2004 indicates inter alia page 10 as amended by the examining 
division; other pages of the description have been amended. 
In the Druckexemplar, page 10 as originally filed is present; no 
amendments are present. 
In this case, the amendment is indicated in EPO Form 2004 so that the 
error does not qualify as a formatting/editing error. Thus, no correction can 
be made after issuance of the decision to grant. 
If any correction in the text of the specification as published is allowed, a 
corrected version of it will be published. However, such a correction has no 
influence on the start of the opposition period. 
In the case of a discrepancy between the Druckexemplar and Form 2004, 
the patent proprietor can seek remedy by filing an appeal against the 
decision to grant. This would apply to example 2 above. 
The situation is different to that of errors already present in the application 
documents or in any of the amended application documents submitted by 
the applicant. An error introduced by the applicant does not qualify as a 
formatting/editing error. A request for correction will not be accepted and 
the situation cannot be remedied by an appeal.  
5. Correction of the translations of the claims 
According to Art. 70(1), the text of a patent in the language of the 
proceedings is the authentic text. It therefore follows that the translations of 
the claims of the patent specification required by Art. 14(6) are for 
Part H – Chapter VI-8 

 
 
information only. Hence no examination of the translations takes place 
(C-V, 1.3); in particular, the translations do not form part of the decision to 
grant the patent. Therefore they cannot be corrected under Rule 140, 
either. However, if when a corrected version of a translation of the claims is 
received, the stage of preparations for the B publication still allows the 
exchange of documents, the EPO will publish the corrected version instead 
of the original version of the translation. 
Where corrected translations of claims are not submitted to the EPO in time 
to be taken into account for the B publication, the only possibilities for the 
patent proprietor to amend them are when the patent is maintained in 
amended form (Rule 82(2)) or, as indicated in Art. 70(4), before a national 
authority. 
6. Errors in publication 
Errors in publication occur where the content of the printed specification 
differs from the documents (Druckexemplar) transmitted to the applicant 
with the communication under Rule 71(3) (Form 2004), if these documents 
form the basis of the decision to grant. 
Errors in publication have to be distinguished from changes introduced in 
the text to be granted after the applicant's approval but before the decision 
to grant (G 1/10). In such cases, the patent proprietor has to file an appeal 
to seek remedy. 
The above errors in publication can be corrected at any time (see also 
C-V, 10). The same applies mutatis mutandis to errors in the process for 
publication of the application and of the amended patent specification 
following a decision to maintain the patent as amended. 
The competence to correct errors in publication lies with the body before 
which proceedings are or were last pending. 
Therefore a request for correction of errors in the publication of the 
B1 specifications filed during opposition proceedings is dealt with by the 
opposition division. 
Formalities officers are responsible for the correction of publication errors 
(see the decision of the President of the EPO dated 23 November 2015, 
OJ EPO 2015, A104).  

 
